Genesis
Genesis 1
God created the heavens, the earth and everything that
lives. He made humankind in his image, and gave them
charge over the earth.
Genesis 2
God formed a man and gave him the garden in Eden, except
the tree of good and evil. Adam was alone so God made a
woman as his partner.
Genesis 3
The serpent deceived the woman. She and Adam ate from
the tree. The ground was cursed, and God sent Adam and
Eve out of the garden.
Genesis 4
Eve's sons made offerings to the LORD. Only Abel's was
acceptable, so Cain killed him. Abel's blood cried out and
God sent Cain away.
Genesis 5
Adam's line was: Seth, Enosh, Kenan, Mahalalel, Jared,
Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech and Noah. Noah's sons were
Shem, Ham and Japheth.
Genesis 6
Humankind corrupted the earth with evil. God decided to
destroy them. He told Noah to build an ark to be saved from
the flood.
Genesis 7
Noah and his family went into the ark with two of each
creature. It rained for forty days and forty nights and the
earth was covered.
Genesis 8
The flood abated. Noah sent out a raven and two doves.
When the earth was dry God called them all out of the ark.
Noah built an altar.
Genesis 9
God blessed Noah and set the rainbow as a sign that he
would never flood the earth again. Noah got drunk and
cursed Ham's son Canaan.
Genesis 10
Japheth's line lived in the coastlands; Ham's included
Nimrod and the Canaanites; Shem's lived in the East. These
formed the nations.
Genesis 11
They began building a great tower for themselves, but the
Lord confused their language. Shem's line included Abram
who married Sarai.
Genesis 12
God told Abram, "Go, I will make you a great nation. You will
be a blessing." In Egypt Abram lied about Sarai and Pharaoh
was cursed.
Genesis 13
Abram journeyed with his nephew Lot. Their servants
argued, so Lot went to Sodom, Abram to Canaan. The LORD
promised Abram the land.
Genesis 14
The kings went to war and took Lot captive. Abram rescued
Lot. Melchizedek blessed Abram and Abram gave him a
tenth of everything.
Genesis 15
The Lord promised Abram an heir and many descendants.
Abram believed. He was told that they would be enslaved
but would then return.
Genesis 16
Sarai told Abram to have children with Hagar. Hagar
conceived, then ran away, but an angel sent her back.
Hagar's son was Ishmael.
Genesis 17
God made a covenant with Abram and renamed him
Abraham. He renamed Sarai Sarah and promised them a
son. The men were circumcised.
Genesis 18
Three visitors came and said that Sarah would have a son
next year. Sodom was very evil; Abraham pleaded with the
LORD for the city.
Genesis 19
Angels took Lot out of Sodom. The city was destroyed by fire
and Lot's wife was turned to salt. His daughters had children
for him.
Genesis 20
In Gerar Abraham said, "Sarah is my sister." King Abimelech
took her but God warned him in a dream. He restored Sarah
to Abraham.
Genesis 21
As promised, Sarah had a son: Isaac. She had Hagar and
Ishmael sent away but God preserved them. Abraham and
Abimelech made a treaty.
Genesis 22
God told Abraham to sacrifice Isaac. As Abraham obeyed, an
angel stopped him. The LORD provided a ram instead and
blessed Abraham.
Genesis 23
Sarah died in Kiriath-arba. Abraham asked the Hittites for a
burial site. He bought a cave from Ephron and buried Sarah
there.
Genesis 24
Abraham's servant went to Nahor to find a wife for Isaac. He
met Rebekah by the well. She went back with him and
married Isaac.
Genesis 25
Abraham died and was buried with Sarah. Isaac and
Rebekah had twins: Esau and Jacob. Esau sold his birthright
to Jacob for a meal.
Genesis 26
In Gerar Isaac lied about Rebekah. He grew so rich that
Abimelech sent him away. He dug wells, and at Beersheba
the LORD blessed him.
Genesis 27
Rebekah and Jacob tricked Isaac into giving Jacob his
blessing. Esau vowed revenge so Rebekah told Jacob to go
to her brother Laban.
Genesis 28
Isaac sent Jacob to marry one of Laban's daughters. On the
way Jacob dreamed of a ladder reaching to heaven and the
LORD blessed him.
Genesis 29
Jacob worked for Laban seven years to marry Rachel, but
Laban gave him Leah and made him work seven more for
Rachel. Leah had sons.
Genesis 30
Rachel's maid had sons for Jacob, then Leah's maid, then
Leah. Finally Rachel had a son. Laban allowed Jacob flocks
as wages to stay.
Genesis 31
The Lord told Jacob to return home. Jacob left in secret and
Rachel took Laban's idols. Laban chased Jacob but they
made a treaty.
Genesis 32
Jacob heard that Esau was coming to meet him. He was
afraid and sent gifts. That night he wrestled with a man who
renamed him Israel.
Genesis 33
Esau and his men arrived. Jacob bowed down but Esau ran
to embrace him. Jacob settled near Shechem and built an
altar.
Genesis 34
Shechem raped Jacob's daughter and asked to marry her.
Jacob's sons told him to circumcise his men, then Simeon
and Levi killed them.
Genesis 35
Jacob went to Bethel and God renamed him Israel. They
journeyed on. Rachel died having Israel's twelfth son. Isaac
died in Hebron.
Genesis 36
Esau's sons were Eliphaz, Reuel, Jeush, Jalam and Korah.
Esau and his family moved away to Seir. They became the
Edomites.
Genesis 37
Joseph was Israel's favourite son. He had dreams and his
brothers were jealous so they sold him. He was bought by
Potiphar in Egypt.
Genesis 38
Judah's sons Er and Onan died, leaving Tamar a widow.
Judah sent her away but she put on a veil and he slept with
her. She had twins.
Genesis 39
Potiphar put Joseph in charge of his house. His wife tried to
seduce Joseph, then lied about it, so Potiphar put Joseph in
prison.
Genesis 40
Pharaoh put his cupbearer and baker in prison. Joseph
interpreted their dreams. The cupbearer was restored but
the baker was hanged.
Genesis 41
Pharaoh had a dream and called for Joseph to interpret it.
The dream predicted a famine. Pharaoh put Joseph in charge
of all Egypt.
Genesis 42
Joseph's brothers went to Egypt to buy grain but didn't
recognise him. He kept Simeon in prison and sent the rest to
fetch Benjamin.
Genesis 43
When the grain ran out, Joseph's brothers went back to
Egypt with Benjamin. Joseph invited them to his house and
gave them a feast.
Genesis 44
Joseph hid his cup in Benjamin's sack, then sent a steward
after his brothers. Judah offered himself as a slave instead
of Benjamin.
Genesis 45
Joseph told his brothers who he was. They were afraid, but
he told them, "God sent me here." His brothers went to
fetch their father.
Genesis 46
So Israel set out with all his household. God told him not to
be afraid. Israel and all his family came to Egypt and Joseph
met him.
Genesis 47
Pharaoh allowed Joseph's family to settle in Goshen. The
famine continued and the Egyptians sold all they had to
Pharaoh for food.
Genesis 48
Jacob became ill, so Joseph took his sons to see him. Jacob
blessed Joseph's sons as his own, putting Ephraim ahead of
Manasseh.
Genesis 49
Jacob gathered his sons and blessed each of them. He
charged them to bury him with Abraham in the cave in
Canaan, and then he died.
Genesis 50
Pharaoh allowed Joseph to go and bury Jacob. Before Joseph
died, he said that God would lead his people back to the
promised land.
Exodus
Exodus 1
The Israelites prospered in Egypt, but a new king arose and
forced them into hard labour. He commanded that their
baby boys be killed.
Exodus 2
Pharaoh's daughter found a Hebrew baby by the river. She
named him Moses. When he grew up, Moses killed an
Egyptian and fled to Midian.
Exodus 3
Moses saw a burning bush. God told him to lead the
Israelites out of Egypt. Moses asked God his name and God
said, "I am who I am."
Exodus 4
The LORD gave Moses signs so that the people would listen.
Moses was afraid, so the LORD sent his brother Aaron to
speak for him.
Exodus 5
Moses and Aaron told Pharaoh to let the Israelites go into
the desert to worship. Pharaoh refused and increased their
workload instead.
Exodus 6
The LORD told Moses that he would lead the Israelites out of
Egypt to the promised land. Aaron and Moses were from the
tribe of Levi.
Exodus 7
Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh. Aaron's staff became a
snake, then the LORD turned the Nile to blood, but Pharaoh
wouldn't listen.
Exodus 8
The LORD sent a plague of frogs on Egypt. Pharaoh begged
for relief but then hardened his heart. The LORD sent gnats
and then flies.
Exodus 9
The LORD sent a plague on the livestock of Egypt, then boils
and then hail. Pharaoh begged for relief but then his heart
was hardened.
Exodus 10
The LORD sent a plague of locusts. Pharaoh begged for
relief but then his heart was hardened. The LORD sent
darkness for three days.
Exodus 11
The LORD said that he would send one more plague, and
then Pharaoh would let the Israelites go: all the firstborn
Egyptians would die.
Exodus 12
The LORD told the Israelites to take Passover. That night all
the firstborn Egyptians were killed. Pharaoh told the
Israelites to go.
Exodus 13
The LORD told the Israelites to consecrate their firstborns to
him. He guided them as a pillar of cloud by day and of fire
by night.
Exodus 14
Pharaoh's army caught the Israelites by the sea. The LORD
parted the waters and the Israelites crossed. The Egyptian
army was drowned.
Exodus 15
The Israelites sang: "I will sing to the LORD, for he has
triumphed; horse and rider he has thrown into the sea."
They camped at Elim.
Exodus 16
The Israelites grumbled to Moses that they had no food, so
each day the LORD provided quails and manna. They rested
on the sabbath.
Exodus 17
The LORD told Moses to strike a rock to provide water.
Amalek attacked Israel, but as Moses held up his arms
Joshua's army prevailed.
Exodus 18
Moses' father-in-law Jethro came and offered sacrifices to
God. He suggested that Moses appoint leaders to help him
judge the people.
Exodus 19
The Israelites camped near the mountain in Sinai. The LORD
spoke to Moses on the mountain and made his covenant
with Israel.
Exodus 20
I am the LORD your God. Honour the LORD above
everything. Keep the Sabbath. Honour your parents. Don't
do wrong to your neighbours.
Exodus 21
If you buy a Hebrew slave he shall go free in the seventh
year. Whoever kills shall be put to death. Whoever injures
shall compensate.
Exodus 22
Whoever steals shall make restitution. If a man sleeps with a
virgin he shall marry her. You shall not oppress strangers or
the poor.
Exodus 23
You shall not pervert justice. Each year you shall hold feasts.
My angel will lead you and I will drive your enemies from the
land.
Exodus 24
The people said, "All that the LORD has spoken we will do",
and they offered sacrifices. The LORD told Moses to stay on
the mountain.
Exodus 25
Tell the Israelites to make a sanctuary for me. Make an ark
with a mercy seat and two cherubim. Make a table. Then
make a lampstand.
Exodus 26
Make a tabernacle of fine linen. Make curtains of goats' hair
to cover the tabernacle. Make boards of acacia wood and a
linen veil.
Exodus 27
Make an altar of acacia wood with bronze utensils. Make a
court for the tabernacle of fine linen hangings and bronze
pillars.
Exodus 28
Set apart Aaron and his sons to minister as priests. Make a
breastplate, an ephod, a robe, a tunic, a turban and a sash
for them.
Exodus 29
Sacrifice a young bull and two rams to consecrate Aaron
and his sons. Make daily sacrifices on the altar and I will
dwell with Israel.
Exodus 30
Make an altar for burning incense. The Israelites shall each
give half a shekel. Make a bronze laver. Make anointing oil
and incense.
Exodus 31
I have filled Bezalel with the Spirit of God, with skill to make
everything I have commanded. The seventh day is a
Sabbath of rest.
Exodus 32
While Moses was away the people worshipped a golden calf.
Moses pleaded with the LORD for them, but then had three
thousand killed.
Exodus 33
Moses set up a tent of meeting. He said to the LORD, "Don't
send us from here without your presence." The LORD passed
near to Moses.
Exodus 34
Moses made new tablets for the law. The LORD spoke to him
and made a covenant with Israel. When Moses returned his
face was shining.
Exodus 35
Moses told the Israelites to keep the Sabbath. He called for
craftsmen to make the tabernacle. The people gave gifts for
the work.
Exodus 36
The people gave more than enough. The craftsmen made
the curtains. Bezalel made the curtains, the boards, the veil
and the pillars.
Exodus 37
Bezalel made the ark with its cherubim, the table, the
lampstand and the incense altar. He made the anointing oil
and the incense.
Exodus 38
Bezalel made the altar of burnt offering, the laver and the
court. Ithamar kept an inventory of the gold, silver and
bronze used.
Exodus 39
They made the ephod, breastplate, tunics, turban and sash
for Aaron. Moses saw that it had all been made as the LORD
had commanded.
Exodus 40
Moses set up the tabernacle and brought the ark into it, as
the LORD had commanded. Then the glory of the LORD filled
the tabernacle.
Leviticus
Leviticus 1
Whoever brings a burnt offering should slaughter a bull, a
sheep, a goat or a bird. The priest shall burn it on the altar
to the LORD.
Leviticus 2
A grain offering should be fine flour with oil and incense.
The priest shall burn a portion. The rest belongs to Aaron
and his sons.
Leviticus 3
A peace offering should be from the herd or the flock.
Slaughter it at the tabernacle. The priest shall burn it on the
altar as food.
Leviticus 4
If anyone sins unintentionally they should slaughter a bull, a
goat or a lamb. The priest shall burn it to the LORD to make
atonement.
Leviticus 5
When anyone sins with an oath or becomes unclean they
should confess it and bring a sin offering. A guilt offering
should be a ram.
Leviticus 6
When anyone cheats a neighbour they should make
restitution and bring a guilt offering. The fire on the altar
shall never go out.
Leviticus 7
The meat of a peace offering must be eaten within two
days. Do not eat fat or blood. The wave offering belongs to
Aaron and his sons.
Leviticus 8
Moses gathered the people at the tabernacle. He made
offerings on the altar and consecrated Aaron and his sons
with oil and blood.
Leviticus 9
Aaron brought a sin offering and a burnt offering to make
atonement. The glory of the LORD appeared and a fire
consumed the offerings.
Leviticus 10
Nadab and Abihu offered strange fire, so fire came from the
LORD and killed them. Aaron and his other sons stayed at
the tabernacle.
Leviticus 11
You may eat animals with cloven hooves that chew the cud,
and fish with scales and fins. Anything that touches a
carcass is unclean.
Leviticus 12
A male child shall be circumcised on the eighth day. A
woman who gives birth shall bring offerings after her days
of purification.
Leviticus 13
If anyone has leprosy the priest shall declare them unclean
and they shall live outside the camp. A leprous garment
shall be burned.
Leviticus 14
If anyone is healed of leprosy they shall shave their hair and
bring offerings. If a house has mildew the priest shall
inspect it.
Leviticus 15
When a man has a discharge he is unclean. When he
ejaculates he is unclean until evening. When a woman has
her period she is unclean.
Leviticus 16
Once a year Aaron shall make atonement for the people. He
shall bring one goat as a sin offering and release another as
a scapegoat.
Leviticus 17
Anyone who kills an animal and does not bring an offering is
guilty. The life is in the blood and I have given it to make
atonement.
Leviticus 18
Don't have sex with a relative, a woman on her period, your
neighbour's wife, another man or an animal. These things
defile the land.
Leviticus 19
Be holy. Keep my Sabbaths. Don't turn to idols. Love your
neighbour as yourself. Don't mix livestock. Do no injustice. I
am the LORD.
Leviticus 20
Anyone who worships Molech, curses their parents, commits
adultery or has sex with a man shall be put to death. You
shall be holy.
Leviticus 21
A priest must not make himself unclean and must only
marry a virgin. No descendant of Aaron with a defect may
offer the offerings.
Leviticus 22
A priest shall not eat the offerings if he is unclean. No
outsider shall eat the offerings. Offerings must be animals
without defect.
Leviticus 23
as feasts: Passover, Unleavened Bread, First Fruits, Fifty
Days Later, the Day of Trumpets, the Day of Atonement and
Booths.
Leviticus 24
Aaron is to tend the lamps and set out the bread before the
LORD. An Israelite blasphemed so they took him outside and
stoned him.
Leviticus 25
Every seventh year the land shall rest. Every fiftieth year
shall be a jubilee, when property shall be restored and
slaves released.
Leviticus 26
If you keep my laws I will give peace in the land and make
you fruitful. If not I will scatter you, but I will not break my
covenant.
Leviticus 27
If anyone dedicates a person or land to the LORD you shall
make a valuation. A tithe of everything from the land
belongs to the LORD.
Numbers
Numbers 1
The LORD told Moses to count the Israelite armies. The
number of men over twenty years old was 603,550. The
Levites were not counted.
Numbers 2
The Israelites shall camp around the tabernacle: Judah to
the east, Reuben to the south, Ephraim to the west and Dan
to the north.
Numbers 3
The Levites are to assist Aaron. I have taken them in place
of every firstborn. The number of Levites over one month
old was 22,000.
Numbers 4
The Kohathites are to carry the most holy things. The
Gershonites are to carry the coverings. The Merarites are to
carry the frame.
Numbers 5
Anyone who sins shall make restitution and add a fifth. If a
man suspects his wife of unfaithfulness he shall take her to
the priest.
Numbers 6
Anyone who makes a Nazirite vow shall not drink wine or cut
their hair. Aaron's blessing shall be: "The LORD bless you
and keep you."
Numbers 7
The leader of each tribe brought a grain offering, a burnt
offering, a sin offering and peace offerings. Moses spoke
with the LORD.
Numbers 8
Present the Levites as a wave offering to the LORD and
make atonement for them. I have set them apart to serve at
the tent of meeting.
Numbers 9
In the first month of the second year the Israelites kept the
Passover. Whenever the cloud lifted from the tabernacle
they journeyed.
Numbers 10
Make two silver trumpets to direct the congregation. In the
second month the cloud lifted and they set out as the LORD
had commanded.
Numbers 11
The people grumbled that they had no meat. The LORD was
angry but he sent quails. He put his Spirit on seventy elders
to help Moses.
Numbers 12
Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses. The LORD was
angry and Miriam became leprous. Moses prayed and after
seven days she returned.
Numbers 13
Moses sent men to spy out the land of Canaan. Caleb said,
"Let us go up," but the others said that the inhabitants were
too strong.
Numbers 14
The people grumbled so the LORD said that they would
spend forty years in the wilderness. They went up to the
land but were defeated.
Numbers 15
There is one law for you and for strangers. Make an offering
if you sin unintentionally. Anyone who sins defiantly shall be
cut off.
Numbers 16
Korah, Dathan and Abiram rose against Moses and Aaron.
Moses said, "The LORD will choose." The ground swallowed
up those with Korah.
Numbers 17
The LORD told Moses to bring a staff from each tribal leader
to the Tent of Meeting to stop the grumbling. Aaron's staff
blossomed.
Numbers 18
The LORD told Aaron: "I have given you the Levites to work
at the Tent of Meeting. Everything that is devoted to the
LORD is yours."
Numbers 19
Burn a heifer outside the camp for the water of cleansing.
Anyone who is unclean and does not cleanse themselves
shall be cut off.
Numbers 20
The LORD told Moses to speak to a rock to produce water
but he struck the rock. Edom refused Israel passage. Aaron
died at Mount Hor.
Numbers 21
The people grumbled so the LORD sent snakes. Moses made
a bronze snake and whoever looked at it lived. Israel
defeated the Amorites.
Numbers 22
Balak sent for Balaam to curse Israel. Balaam's donkey
warned him. The Angel of the LORD said, "Go, but speak
only what I tell you."
Numbers 23
The LORD gave Balaam a word: "How can I curse whom God
has not cursed?" Then at another place: "The LORD their
God is with Israel."
Numbers 24
Balaam gave a word: "How lovely are your tents, O Jacob."
Balak was angry. Balaam said: "A star and a sceptre shall
rise in Israel."
Numbers 25
The people were unfaithful with Moabite women and
worshipped their gods. Phinehas killed one couple and the
LORD commended his zeal.
Numbers 26
The LORD told Moses and Eleazar to take a census. There
were 601,730 fighting men and 23,000 Levites. Only Joshua
and Caleb remained.
Numbers 27
The daughters of Zelophehad were given an inheritance.
The LORD told Moses that he was to die. Moses
commissioned Joshua as leader.
Numbers 28
Bring offerings each morning and evening, on the Sabbath
and on the first of the month. Celebrate Passover and the
Feast of Weeks.
Numbers 29
In the seventh month on first day sound the trumpets; on
the tenth day make atonement; on the fifteenth day
celebrate for seven days.
Numbers 30
When a man makes a vow he must not break his word.
When a woman makes a vow it shall stand unless her father
or husband forbids it.
Numbers 31
The LORD told Moses to take vengeance on the Midianites.
The Israelites killed the men, burned their cities and divided
the spoils.
Numbers 32
Reuben and Gad asked to settle in Gilead. Moses agreed if
they helped to conquer the land, so Reuben, Gad and
Manasseh built cities.
Numbers 33
The Israelites journeyed from Egypt. In the fortieth year
Aaron died. They camped by the Jordan and the LORD said,
"Take the land."
Numbers 34
Your borders in Canaan shall be Edom, the Great Sea, Mount
Hor and the Jordan. Eleazar and Joshua shall divide the land
among you.
Numbers 35
You shall give cities to the Levites. Appoint cites of refuge
for anyone who has killed accidently. A murderer shall be
put to death.
Numbers 36
The clan of Gilead asked about Zelophehad's daughters.
Moses said, "Daughters who inherit land must marry within
their own tribe."
Deuteronomy
Deuteronomy 1
The words of Moses: We journeyed from Horeb. You would
not go up to take the land, so the LORD said, "This
generation will not see it."
Deuteronomy 2
We went into the wilderness. Thirty-eight years passed, then
the LORD told us to cross by Moab. He delivered Sihon the
Amorite to us.
Deuteronomy 3
The LORD delivered Og of Bashan to us. I gave Gilead to
Reuben, Gad and Manasseh. The LORD said that I would not
cross into the land.
Deuteronomy 4
Now, Israel, hear the commandments and obey them. You
heard the LORD speak from the fire. Take care not to make
idols. The LORD is God.
Deuteronomy 5
The LORD made his covenant with us: Have no other gods;
Keep the Sabbath; Honour your parents. You shall do all that
he has commanded.
Deuteronomy 6
Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God is one. Love the LORD
with all your heart, soul and strength. Teach your children
these commandments.
Deuteronomy 7
Make no treaty with the nations of the land. You are a holy
people, the LORD has chosen you. He will drive out the
nations before you.
Deuteronomy 8
The LORD led you in the wilderness and tested you. He is
bringing you into a good land. Do not forget the LORD or
you shall perish.
Deuteronomy 9
It is not for your righteousness that you will occupy the land.
You rebelled and made the calf so I broke the tablets of the
covenant.
Deuteronomy 10
The LORD wrote on new tablets. What does the LORD ask?
That you fear him, walk in his ways, love him, serve him and
keep his commands.
Deuteronomy 11
You have seen all that the LORD has done. Keep these
commands so that you may live long in the land. There is a
blessing and a curse.
Deuteronomy 12
Destroy the high places where the nations worship their
gods. You shall bring your offerings at the place that the
LORD will choose.
Deuteronomy 13
If a prophet or anyone else entices you away from the LORD
they must be put to death. If a town has turned away it
must be destroyed.
Deuteronomy 14
You may eat animals with cloven hooves that chew the cud.
Bring a tithe from your fields to eat before the LORD and for
the Levites.
Deuteronomy 15
Every seven years you shall cancel debts. Hebrew slaves
shall go free in the seventh year. Set apart every firstborn
male animal.
Deuteronomy 16
Celebrate the Passover in the month of Abib. Celebrate the
Feast of Weeks and the Feast of Booths. Appoint judges in
all your towns.
Deuteronomy 17
Anyone who breaks the covenant shall be put to death. Go
to the priests with hard decisions. Appoint the king that the
LORD chooses.
Deuteronomy 18
The priests shall eat the offerings made by fire. You shall not
practise divination. The LORD will raise up a prophet from
among you.
Deuteronomy 19
Set aside three cities so that anyone who kills accidently
may flee there. A matter must be established by two or
three witnesses.
Deuteronomy 20
When you go to war, do not be afraid; the LORD is with you.
As you go to attack a city, offer terms, except to the cities of
the land.
Deuteronomy 21
If a dead body is found, the city elders must cleanse the
guilt. Give your eldest son his portion. A rebellious son shall
be stoned.
Deuteronomy 22
If you find your neighbour's ox you shall return it. If a man
falsely claims that his new wife was not a virgin he shall be
punished.
Deuteronomy 23
No Ammonite shall enter the assembly of the LORD. When
you go out to war the camp must be holy. Be careful to do
what you have vowed.
Deuteronomy 24
If a man divorces his wife he must not remarry her. Do not
withhold wages. Leave the gleanings of your harvest for
widows and orphans.
Deuteronomy 25
A judge may give up to forty lashes. If a man dies and has
no son, his brother shall marry his widow. You shall have
honest weights.
Deuteronomy 26
Bring the firstfruits of the land to the LORD. Bring a tithe in
the third year and say to the LORD, "Look down and bless
your people."
Deuteronomy 27
Write the law on large stones. The Levites will say, "Cursed
is anyone who does not keep the law," and the people will
reply, "Amen."
Deuteronomy 28
If you obey the LORD he will bless you above all nations; if
not, you will be cursed and the LORD will send a nation to
destroy you.
Deuteronomy 29
You have seen all that the LORD has done so keep this
covenant. If you break it the land will be cursed and the
LORD will uproot you.
Deuteronomy 30
When you return to the LORD he will have compassion; he
will circumcise your heart. I have set before you life and
death. Choose life.
Deuteronomy 31
Joshua will cross ahead of you. Read the law every seven
years. The LORD said, "The people will turn away. Write a
song as a witness."
Deuteronomy 32
Ascribe greatness to our God! The LORD's portion is his
people; They turned away so he spurned them; But he will
provide atonement.
Deuteronomy 33
Moses blessed Israel before his death: Let Reuben live; bless
Levi's work; Joseph's land is blessed. The eternal God is your
refuge.
Deuteronomy 34
Moses climbed Mount Nebo. There the LORD showed him
the promised land. Then Moses died. No prophet has arisen
in Israel like Moses.
Joshua
Joshua 1
The LORD said to Joshua, "Arise, cross into the land. Be
strong and courageous." So Joshua told the officers to
prepare provisions.
Joshua 2
Joshua sent two spies to Jericho. A prostitute called Rahab
hid them, so they promised to spare her family. They
reported to Joshua.
Joshua 3
The Israelites camped by the Jordan. When the priests
carrying the ark reached the river it stopped, so Israel
crossed on dry ground.
Joshua 4
The LORD told Joshua to set up memorial stones from the
Jordan. When the priests brought the ark up to the bank the
waters returned.
Joshua 5
The LORD told Joshua to circumcise the men. They called
the place Gilgal. Joshua met the commander of the LORD's
army and bowed down.
Joshua 6
The LORD said that the army should march around Jericho.
On the seventh day they shouted and the walls fell. They
destroyed the city.
Joshua 7
Achan took some banned items. When the army went
against Ai they were defeated. The LORD identified Achan
and the people stoned him.
Joshua 8
The LORD told Joshua to take the army against Ai. They set
up an ambush and destroyed the city. Joshua read out the
book of the law.
Joshua 9
The Gibeonites sent envoys. They pretended that they were
from far away and made a treaty. The Israelites found out
but spared them.
Joshua 10
Five Amorite kings attacked the Gibeonites. The sun stood
still while the Israelites took revenge. Joshua defeated the
whole region.
Joshua 11
The kings of the north joined forces to fight against Israel
but the LORD gave Joshua victory. So Joshua took the whole
land.
Joshua 12
Israel defeated the kings east of the Jordan under Moses
and the kings west of the Jordan under Joshua. Thirty-one
kings in total.
Joshua 13
Now Joshua was old. The LORD said, "Divide the remaining
land among the tribes." Moses had given land to Reuben,
Gad and Manasseh.
Joshua 14
Judah came to Joshua. Caleb said, "Moses promised me the
mountain because I obeyed the LORD fully." So Joshua gave
Hebron to Caleb.
Joshua 15
Judah's land bordered with Edom to the south. Caleb took
Hebron, Othniel took Kiriath-sepher but Judah could not
defeat Jerusalem.
Joshua 16
Joseph's land was from the Jordan to the sea. Ephraim's
territory was within Manasseh's. Ephraim did not drive out
the Canaanites.
Joshua 17
There was a lot for Machir the firstborn of Manasseh and a
lot for the rest of Manasseh. Manasseh did not drive out the
Canaanites.
Joshua 18
Joshua sent surveyors from the remaining tribes and then
divided the land. Benjamin's lot was from Kiriath-jearim to
the Salt Sea.
Joshua 19
Simeon's lot was within Judah's. There were lots for Zebulun,
Issachar, Asher, Naphtali and Dan. The Israelites gave
Joshua a city.
Joshua 20
The LORD said to Joshua, "Appoint the cities of refuge." So
they set apart Kedesh, Shechem, Hebron, Bezer, Ramoth
and Golan.
Joshua 21
The Israelites gave cities and pasture lands to the Levites.
So the LORD gave Israel all the land he had promised to
their fathers.
Joshua 22
Reuben, Gad and Manasseh went back to their land and
built an altar. They reassured Phinehas that they had not
turned from the LORD.
Joshua 23
Joshua summoned Israel and said, "You have seen all that
the LORD has done. Hold fast to the LORD or you will perish
from the land."
Joshua 24
Joshua said to the people, "Choose this day whom you will
serve," and they replied, "We will serve the LORD." Then
Joshua died.
Judges
Judges 1
Judah defeated the Canaanites and took Jerusalem. Joseph
put Bethel to the sword. But the Canaanites were not driven
out completely.
Judges 2
After Joshua's generation died the Israelites served Baals.
The LORD sold them to their enemies but raised up judges
to deliver them.
Judges 3
After Othniel died the Israelites did evil. King Eglon defeated
them. The LORD raised up Ehud who thrust a sword into
Eglon's belly.
Judges 4
Jabin and Sisera oppressed Israel. Deborah sent Barak
against them and the LORD routed them. Jael drove a peg
through Sisera's head.
Judges 5
Deborah and Barak sang: "When leaders lead and people
are willing, praise the LORD! Blessed is Jael; Let your
enemies perish, O LORD!"
Judges 6
The LORD gave the Israelites to Midian. The angel of the
LORD told Gideon to save Israel and gave him a sign.
Gideon gathered an army.
Judges 7
The LORD told Gideon to send away all but 300 men. The
300 crept into the Midianite camp. They blew trumpets and
the Midianites fled.
Judges 8
Gideon defeated Zebah and Zalmunna and punished
Succoth and Penuel. He refused to rule Israel. When Gideon
died Israel served Baals.
Judges 9
Abimelech killed his brothers and ruled over Israel. Gaal
rose against him. Abimelech destroyed Shechem but was
killed by a millstone.
Judges 10
Again the Israelites did evil. The LORD sold them to the
Philistines and the Ammonites. They cried out and put aside
foreign gods.
Judges 11
Jephthah vowed to sacrifice whatever came out to meet him
if he defeated the Ammonites. His daughter met him so he
sacrificed her.
Judges 12
The Ephraimites attacked Jephthah. Jephthah and the
Gileadites defeated them and caught survivors by making
them say 'Shibboleth'.
Judges 13
The LORD gave Israel to the Philistines. The angel of the
LORD told Manoah's wife that she would conceive. She
named her son Samson.
Judges 14
Samson took a Philistine wife. He killed a lion and bees
made honey in the carcass. He posed a riddle but his wife
explained it.
Judges 15
Samson's wife married another man so Samson burned the
Philistine crops. The Israelites bound him. He killed a
thousand Philistines.
Judges 16
Samson loved Delilah. She had his hair shaved so he lost his
strength and was captured. He died pulling down the
Philistine temple.
Judges 17
Micah set up a shrine. There was no king so everyone did
what was right in their own eyes. Micah appointed a Levite
as his priest.
Judges 18
Spies from Dan stayed with Micah. When the Danites went
against Laish they took Micah's idol and his priest. They
named the city Dan.
Judges 19
A Levite came to Gibeah. The men of the city raped his
concubine until she died. He cut up her body and sent a
piece to each tribe.
Judges 20
The Israelites gathered to attack Gibeah. The Benjaminites
defended the city but they were defeated and only 600 of
them survived.
Judges 21
The Israelites grieved that a tribe would be cut off. They
destroyed Jabesh-gilead and captured wives for the
remaining Benjaminites.
Ruth
Ruth 1
Naomi, an Ephraimite, lived in Moab. Her husband and two
sons died so she returned to Bethlehem with her daughterin-law, Ruth.
Ruth 2
Naomi had a rich relative named Boaz. Ruth went to glean
in his fields. Boaz gave her food and told his men to leave
grain for her.
Ruth 3
Naomi told Ruth to go and sleep at Boaz's feet. When Boaz
awoke, Ruth said, "You are my kinsman." Boaz said that he
would marry her.
Ruth 4
Boaz settled the inheritance with another kinsman and
married Ruth. Ruth bore a son, Obed. Obed was father of
Jesse, father of David.
1 Samuel
1 Samuel 1
Hannah had no children. She cried out to the LORD,
"Remember your servant." She bore a son, Samuel, and
took him to Eli the priest.
1 Samuel 2
Hannah prayed, "The LORD humbles and lifts up." Eli's sons
did evil but Samuel served the LORD. A prophet condemned
the house of Eli.
1 Samuel 3
The LORD called Samuel. Eli told Samuel to answer, "Speak,
LORD." The LORD told Samuel that he was about to judge
the house of Eli.
1 Samuel 4
The Israelites were defeated by the Philistines and Eli's sons
were killed. When Eli heard that the ark had been captured,
he died.
1 Samuel 5
The Philistines put the ark in their temple. Their god fell on
his face before it. The city became cursed so they sent the
ark away.
1 Samuel 6
The Philistines sent the ark away with guilt offerings. The
people of Beth Shemesh found it and rejoiced but some
were struck down.
1 Samuel 7
The ark was taken to Kiriath-jearim. The Philistines attacked
Israel. Samuel cried out to the LORD and the Israelites
defeated them.
1 Samuel 8
The elders of Israel asked Samuel to appoint a king. Samuel
warned them what it would mean. The LORD told Samuel to
give them a king.
1 Samuel 9
Saul went looking for his father's donkeys. The LORD told
Samuel to anoint him ruler of Israel. Samuel invited Saul to
eat with him.
1 Samuel 10
Samuel anointed Saul and gave him signs. The Spirit of God
came upon Saul and he prophesied. Saul was chosen to rule
the Israelites.
1 Samuel 11
The Ammonites attacked Jabesh-gilead. Saul gathered the
Israelites and defeated the Ammonites. The people made
Saul king at Gilgal.
1 Samuel 12
Samuel said, "The LORD brought your fathers out of Egypt.
Now he has given you the king you asked for. Fear the LORD
and serve him."
1 Samuel 13
The Philistines encamped at Michmash. Saul made offerings
to the LORD by himself. Samuel told Saul that his kingdom
would not last.
1 Samuel 14
Saul's son Jonathan went against the Philistines and routed
them. Saul made an oath that no one should eat but
Jonathan was spared.
1 Samuel 15
The LORD told Saul to destroy Amalek but Saul spared King
Agag. Samuel told Saul that the LORD had rejected him.
Samuel killed Agag.
1 Samuel 16
The LORD sent Samuel to anoint Jesse's son David as king.
The Spirit came upon David. Saul sent for David to play the
harp for him.
1 Samuel 17
A Philistine champion named Goliath challenged the
Israelites. David killed Goliath with a sling and a stone. The
Philistines fled.
1 Samuel 18
Jonathan loved David. Saul set David over the army but
became jealous and tried to kill him. David married Saul's
daughter Michal.
1 Samuel 19
Jonathan warned David about Saul. David escaped and fled
to Samuel. Saul went after David but the Spirit of God made
him prophesy.
1 Samuel 20
David and Jonathan agreed a sign. Saul was angry with
Jonathan when David was not at the feast. Jonathan told
David, "Go quickly!"
1 Samuel 21
Ahimelech the priest gave David consecrated bread and
Goliath's sword. David fled to King Achish of Gath and
pretended he was mad.
1 Samuel 22
About four hundred men joined David. Saul ordered that all
the priests be killed because they helped David. Only
Abiathar escaped.
1 Samuel 23
David and his men saved Keilah from the Philistines. Saul
came to Keilah so David escaped. Saul gave chase but he
was called away.
1 Samuel 24
Saul went after David. David cut off a piece of Saul's robe
but spared his life. Saul wept and said, "You shall surely be
king."
1 Samuel 25
Samuel died. Nabal insulted David so his wife Abigail
pleaded for restraint. The LORD struck Nabal dead and
David married Abigail.
1 Samuel 26
Saul came after David. David took Saul's spear and jug
while he slept but spared his life. David called out and Saul
blessed him.
1 Samuel 27
David lived among the Philistines to escape Saul. King
Achish gave him Ziklag. David secretly raided the land while
he lived there.
1 Samuel 28
The Philistines gathered for war. Saul asked a medium to
call Samuel. Samuel said, "The LORD will hand you over to
the Philistines."
1 Samuel 29
David and his men marched with Achish. The Philistine
commanders said, "He will turn against us," so Achish told
David to go back.
1 Samuel 30
The Amalekites had raided Ziklag. The LORD told David to
pursue them. David and his men rescued the women and
divided the spoils.
1 Samuel 31
The Philistines fought Israel. Saul's sons were killed. Saul
was badly wounded so he fell on his sword. The Israelites
fled.
2 Samuel
2 Samuel 1
A man came and told David that Saul and Jonathan were
dead. David sang: "The beauty of Israel is slain. How the
mighty have fallen!"
2 Samuel 2
David was made king of Judah. Abner made Ish-bosheth
king of Israel. Their men fought and Abner killed Joab's
brother Asahel.
2 Samuel 3
Abner argued with Ish-bosheth and offered to support David.
David asked for his wife Michal. Joab killed Abner and David
mourned.
2 Samuel 4
Ish-bosheth lost heart. His captains Rechab and Baanah
killed him and took his head to David. David commanded
that they be killed.
2 Samuel 5
David was anointed king over Israel. He took Jerusalem and
the LORD was with him. The Philistines gathered but David
defeated them.
2 Samuel 6
David brought the ark from Judah. Uzzah touched it and was
struck down. As the ark came into the city David danced
before the LORD.
2 Samuel 7
The LORD said to Nathan, "Tell David: 'I will establish your
house. Your son will build my house.'" David prayed, "Who
am I, O LORD?"
2 Samuel 8
David defeated the Philistines, the Moabites, King
Hadadezer, the Arameans and the Edomites. He reigned
over Israel with justice.
2 Samuel 9
David heard about Jonathan's son Mephibosheth, who was
lame. He restored Saul's land to Mephibosheth and had him
eat at his table.
2 Samuel 10
The King of Ammon humiliated David's servants and hired
the Arameans for war. Joab defeated them and David
defeated King Hadadezer.
2 Samuel 11
David lay with Uriah's wife Bathsheba and she fell pregnant.
He told Joab to have Uriah killed in battle. David married
Bathsheba.
2 Samuel 12
Nathan asked David, "Why have you done evil?" David
pleaded with God but his child with Bathsheba died. Then
Bathsheba bore Solomon.
2 Samuel 13
David's son Amnon sent for his sister Tamar and raped her.
Tamar's brother Absalom had his servants kill Amnon and
then he fled.
2 Samuel 14
Joab sent a wise woman to ask David to bring Absalom back.
David agreed, but he would not let Absalom see his face for
two years.
2 Samuel 15
Absalom went to Hebron and sent out spies to proclaim him
king. David fled, but he told Zadok and Hushai to return to
Jerusalem.
2 Samuel 16
Shimei cursed David but David spared him. Absalom came
to Jerusalem. Ahithophel advised Absalom to sleep with
David's concubines.
2 Samuel 17
Ahithophel wanted to pursue David, but Hushai advised
gathering Israel. Absalom listened to Hushai. Hushai sent a
warning to David.
2 Samuel 18
The servants of David defeated Israel. Absalom got stuck in
a tree and Joab killed him. Ahimaaz and the Cushite ran to
tell David.
2 Samuel 19
The king mourned for Absalom. The men of Judah came to
escort him back across the Jordan. Shimei and
Mephibosheth came to meet him.
2 Samuel 20
Sheba led the men of Israel to desert David. Joab killed
Amasa and besieged Sheba at Abel. The people of Abel cut
off Sheba's head.
2 Samuel 21
There was a famine; so David sought the LORD. He let the
Gibeonites kill seven of Saul's descendants. Israel fought the
Philistines.
2 Samuel 22
David sang: "The LORD is my rock; I called and he
thundered from heaven; He delivered me from my enemy; I
will extol you, O LORD!"
2 Samuel 23
David's last words were: "My house is secure with God."
David's mighty men included the three who brought him
water from Bethlehem.
2 Samuel 24
David numbered the people of Israel and then regretted it.
The LORD sent a plague. David bought Araunah's field and
made offerings.
1 Kings
1 Kings 1
David was very old. His son Adonijah exalted himself as
king. When David heard he told Zadok and Nathan to anoint
Solomon as king.
1 Kings 2
David charged Solomon to keep the law and to punish Joab
and Shimei. Then David died. Solomon had Adonijah, Joab
and Shimei executed.
1 Kings 3
Solomon married Pharaoh's daughter. He asked the LORD
for discernment. Two women came before him and he
judged between them wisely.
1 Kings 4
Solomon had officials and twelve governors. He ruled from
the River to the land of Egypt. Men of all nations came to
hear his wisdom.
1 Kings 5
Solomon sent to King Hiram: "I will build a house for the
LORD. Cut down cedars for me." The workers prepared the
timber and stones.
1 Kings 6
Solomon built the temple. The LORD said, "If you walk in my
ways I will dwell with Israel." Solomon overlaid the temple
with gold.
1 Kings 7
Solomon built his own house. Hiram made pillars, the sea
and utensils for the temple of bronze. Solomon made the
furniture of gold.
1 Kings 8
The priests brought the ark into the temple. Solomon said,
"O LORD, if anyone prays toward this place then hear from
heaven and act."
1 Kings 9
The LORD said to Solomon, "If you walk in my ways I will
establish your throne." Solomon did not make slaves of the
sons of Israel.
1 Kings 10
The queen of Sheba came to test Solomon. She gave him
gold, spices and precious stones. Solomon excelled all the
kings of the earth.
1 Kings 11
Solomon had many wives and turned to other gods. Ahijah
told Jeroboam that the LORD would give him ten of the
tribes. Solomon died.
1 Kings 12
Rehoboam refused to reduce the labour demands on Israel.
So all Israel except Judah made Jeroboam king. Jeroboam
made golden calves.
1 Kings 13
A man of God cried out against Jeroboam's altar. He
disobeyed the LORD by eating at an old prophet's house and
was killed by a lion.
1 Kings 14
Ahijah told Jeroboam's wife: "The LORD says, 'I will sweep
away the house of Jeroboam.'" Rehoboam ruled Judah and
Judah did evil.
1 Kings 15
Abijam ruled Judah and was not devoted to the LORD. Asa
ruled and did right. Nadab ruled Israel and did evil. Baasha
killed Nadab.
1 Kings 16
Elah ruled Israel and did evil. Zimri killed Elah but Israel
made Omri king. Omri did evil. Ahab ruled and began to
worship Baal.
1 Kings 17
Elijah told Ahab, "There will be no rain." Elijah stayed with a
widow in Zarephath. The widow's son died but the LORD
revived him.
1 Kings 18
Elijah went to Ahab and challenged the prophets of Baal.
Baal gave no answer but the LORD answered Elijah with fire.
Then rain fell.
1 Kings 19
Elijah fled from Jezebel. At Horeb there was a wind, an
earthquake and a fire; then the LORD spoke. Elijah put his
mantle on Elisha.
1 Kings 20
Ben-hadad attacked Samaria. Israel defeated the Arameans
twice. Ahab made a treaty with Ben-hadad so a prophet
spoke against him.
1 Kings 21
Naboth would not sell his vineyard, so Jezebel had him
killed. Elijah said to Ahab, "Dogs will lick up your blood and
eat Jezebel."
1 Kings 22
Ahab and Jehoshaphat planned for war. Micaiah said, "I saw
Israel scattered. Your prophets are lying." Ahab was killed in
battle.
2 Kings
2 Kings 1
Ahaziah consulted Baal-zebub. Elijah said that he would die.
Ahaziah sent men to Elijah but they were consumed by fire.
Ahaziah died.
2 Kings 2
Elisha followed Elijah. A chariot of fire appeared and Elijah
went up to heaven. Elisha took Elijah's mantle and divided
the waters.
2 Kings 3
Israel, Judah and Edom went to fight Moab. Elisha said, "The
LORD will send water and give you Moab." The Moabites
were defeated.
2 Kings 4
Elisha told a Shunammite woman that she would have a
son. The child died but Elisha revived him. Elisha cleansed
the food at Gilgal.
2 Kings 5
Naaman of Aram was a leper. Elisha told him to wash in the
Jordan and he was healed. Gehazi asked for a gift and
became leprous.
2 Kings 6
The king of Aram sent an army to capture Elisha but the
LORD blinded them. Ben-hadad besieged Samaria and there
was a great famine.
2 Kings 7
Elisha prophesied an end to the famine. Four lepers went
and found that the Arameans had fled. The people
plundered the Aramean camp.
2 Kings 8
Elisha told Hazael that he would rule Aram. Hazael killed
Ben-hadad. Jehoram ruled Judah and did evil. Ahaziah ruled
and did evil.
2 Kings 9
Elisha sent a prophet to anoint Jehu. Jehu killed Joram and
Ahaziah. Eunuchs threw Jezebel out of the window and dogs
ate her body.
2 Kings 10
Jehu sent a letter and had Ahab's sons killed. He killed
Ahaziah's brothers and all the worshippers of Baal. Hazael
defeated Israel.
2 Kings 11
Athaliah destroyed the royal family but Jehosheba hid Joash.
Jehoiada had the army proclaim Joash as king and put
Athaliah to death.
2 Kings 12
Joash ruled in Jerusalem and did what was right. The priests
collected money to repair the temple. Joash was killed by his
servants.
2 Kings 13
Jehoahaz ruled Israel and they were oppressed by Hazael.
Jehoash ruled and Elisha told him to strike the ground. Then
Elisha died.
2 Kings 14
Amaziah ruled Judah and did right. He challenged Jehoash
but Judah were defeated. Jeroboam ruled Israel and restored
the borders.
2 Kings 15
Azariah and Jotham ruled Judah and did what was right.
Zechariah, Shallum, Menahem, Pekahiah and Pekah ruled
Israel and did evil.
2 Kings 16
Ahaz ruled Judah and did evil. Aram and Israel attacked
Judah so Ahaz sent a tribute to the king of Assyria. Ahaz set
up an altar.
2 Kings 17
Hoshea ruled Israel. The king of Assyria invaded and settled
the land. This happened because the Israelites rejected the
covenant.
2 Kings 18
Hezekiah ruled Judah and did right. The Assyrians
surrounded Jerusalem. Rabshakeh said, "Don't listen to
Hezekiah. Come out to me."
2 Kings 19
Hezekiah prayed, "O LORD, save us." Isaiah said, "The LORD
says: I will defend the city." That night the Assyrians were
struck dead.
2 Kings 20
Hezekiah was sick but the LORD extended his life. Envoys
came from Babylon. Isaiah told Hezekiah, "Everything will
be taken away."
2 Kings 21
Manasseh ruled in Jerusalem and did evil. The LORD said, "I
will bring disaster on Jerusalem and Judah." Amon ruled and
did evil.
2 Kings 22
Josiah ruled and did right. He had the law read out and tore
his robes. Huldah said, "The LORD says: You will be buried in
peace."
2 Kings 23
Josiah destroyed the altars and high places and held
Passover. He was killed in battle. Jehoahaz and Jehoiakim
ruled and did evil.
2 Kings 24
The LORD sent raiders against Judah. Jehoiachin ruled and
Nebuchadnezzer took all Jerusalem captive. Zedekiah ruled
and did evil.
2 Kings 25
Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem. Nebuzaradan burned
the temple and took the people into exile. Evil-merodach
released Jehoiachin.
1 Chronicles
1 Chronicles 1
Adam, Seth, Noah, Shem, Eber, Abraham; Abraham's sons
were Isaac and Ishmael; Isaac's sons were Esau and Israel.
Kings ruled in Edom.
1 Chronicles 2
Judah's line led to Obed, Jesse and David. Caleb was son of
Hezron; Jerahmeel was firstborn of Hezron. Caleb's line were
the Kenites.
1 Chronicles 3
David had six sons at Hebron, four by Bathshua and nine
others. Solomon's line led to Jeconiah, and then to the sons
of Elioenai.
1 Chronicles 4
Reaiah's sons were the Zorathites; God blessed Jabez;
Shelah's sons worked for the king. Simeon's line went to
Gedor to seek pasture.
1 Chronicles 5
Reuben lost his birthright; his sons lived in Gilead. The sons
of Gad and the sons of Manasseh lived in Bashan until the
captivity.
1 Chronicles 6
Levi's sons were Gershon, Kohath and Merari. The musicians
were Heman and Asaph. Aaron's sons made offerings. They
were given cities.
1 Chronicles 7
Issachar's sons were 87,000. Benjamin's sons were Bela,
Beker and Jediael. Ephraim's line led to Joshua. Asher's sons
were 26,000.
1 Chronicles 8
Benjamin was father of Bela, Ashbel, Aharah, Nohah and
Rapha; Ner's line was Kish, Saul, Jonathan; the sons of Ulam
were mighty men.
1 Chronicles 9
Jerusalem was resettled by Judah, Benjamin, Ephraim and
Manasseh; there were priests and Levite gatekeepers. Kish
was father of Saul.
1 Chronicles 10
The Philistines fought Israel and Saul fell on his sword. The
Israelites fled. Saul died for his unfaithfulness against the
LORD.
1 Chronicles 11
The elders anointed David king. David's mighty men
included the three who brought him water from Bethlehem.
Abishai led the thirty.
1 Chronicles 12
Benjaminites and Gadites went over to David at Ziklag.
David made them officers. People kept coming until there
was a great army.
1 Chronicles 13
David said, "Let us bring the ark back." As they carried the
ark Uzzah steadied it and was struck down. David took it to
Obed-edom.
1 Chronicles 14
David had more children. The Philistines attacked; David
inquired of God and when he heard marching in the trees he
defeated them.
1 Chronicles 15
David told the Levites to carry the ark. Heman, Asaph and
Ethan were the musicians. The ark was brought into the city
of David.
1 Chronicles 16
They made offerings and David appointed singers. "Give
thanks to the LORD; He is greatly to be praised!" Asaph
ministered each day.
1 Chronicles 17
The LORD said to Nathan, "Tell David: I will establish your
house; your son will build my house." David prayed, "Who
am I, O LORD?"
1 Chronicles 18
David defeated the Philistines, the Moabites, King
Hadadezer, the Arameans and the Edomites. He reigned
over Israel with justice.
1 Chronicles 19
The King of Ammon humiliated David's servants and hired
the Arameans for war. Joab defeated them and David
defeated King Hadadezer.
1 Chronicles 20
Joab besieged Rabbah and David took the plunder. War
broke out with the Philistines and David and his men killed
the giants.
1 Chronicles 21
Satan led David to count the Israelites. God sent a plague
and a destroying angel. David bought Ornan's field and
made offerings.
1 Chronicles 22
David told Solomon: "The LORD has said that you will build
his temple. I have provided materials." He ordered the
leaders to help.
1 Chronicles 23
David made Solomon king over Israel. He organised the
Levites into the sons of Gershon, Kohath and Merari to serve
in the temple.
1 Chronicles 24
The sons of Aaron were priests. David organised the sons of
Eleazar and Ithamar by lot. The rest of the Levites also cast
lots.
1 Chronicles 25
The sons of Asaph, Heman and Jeduthun prophesied with
music. 288 were trained in singing to the LORD. They cast
lots for duties.
1 Chronicles 26
The sons of Obed-edom, Meshelemiah and Hosah were
gatekeepers. Ahijah, Zetham, Joel, Shubael and Shelomith
oversaw the treasuries.
1 Chronicles 27
Divisions of 24,000 men were on duty month by month.
There was a chief officer over each tribe. Joab was the
commander of the army.
1 Chronicles 28
David assembled the leaders and said, "The LORD has
chosen Solomon to build his house." He gave Solomon the
plans for the temple.
1 Chronicles 29
The leaders gave offerings. David prayed, "Yours is the
kingdom, O LORD. Of your own have we given you." David
died at an old age.
2 Chronicles
2 Chronicles 1
Solomon made offerings. God said, "What shall I give you?"
Solomon said, "Wisdom to rule this people." So Solomon
ruled over Israel.
2 Chronicles 2
Solomon sent to King Hiram: "Send me cedars and a
craftsman for the temple." Hiram replied, "The LORD has
given David a wise son."
2 Chronicles 3
Solomon started work on the temple. He built the portico,
the main hall, the Most Holy Place, two cherubim, the veil
and two pillars.
2 Chronicles 4
Solomon made an altar, the Sea, ten lavers, ten lampstands,
ten tables and the courts for the temple. Huram made the
furnishings.
2 Chronicles 5
The priests brought the ark into the Most Holy Place. The
singers praised the LORD and the glory of the LORD filled
the temple.
2 Chronicles 6
Solomon said, "The LORD has kept his promise." He prayed,
"O LORD, if anyone prays toward this place then hear from
heaven and act."
2 Chronicles 7
Fire came from heaven and the Israelites worshipped. The
LORD said to Solomon, "If you walk in my ways I will
establish your throne."
2 Chronicles 8
Solomon built cities. He did not make slaves of the
Israelites. He appointed the divisions of priests and Levites
to their duties.
2 Chronicles 9
The queen of Sheba came to test Solomon and gave him
gold and spices. Solomon excelled all the kings of the earth.
Then he died.
2 Chronicles 10
Jeroboam and all Israel asked Rehoboam to reduce the
labour demands. He refused. Rehoboam still ruled Judah but
Israel rebelled.
2 Chronicles 11
The LORD told Rehoboam not to attack Jeroboam. All the
Levites came to Judah because Jeroboam set up idols.
Rehoboam had sons.
2 Chronicles 12
Rehoboam was unfaithful to the LORD so Shishak attacked
Jerusalem. Rehoboam humbled himself and the anger of the
LORD turned away.
2 Chronicles 13
Abijah became king of Judah. He drew up battle lines
against Jeroboam and said, "The LORD is our God". The
LORD routed Jeroboam.
2 Chronicles 14
Asa became king. He did right in the sight of the LORD.
Zerah the Ethiopian brought an army against Judah but the
LORD routed them.
2 Chronicles 15
Azariah said to Asa, "The LORD is with you when you are
with Him. Do not give up." The people made a covenant to
seek the LORD.
2 Chronicles 16
Baasha fortified Ramah so Asa made a treaty with Benhadad. Hanani said, "You relied on Aram not the LORD." Asa
became ill and died.
2 Chronicles 17
Jehoshaphat became king and was devoted to the LORD. He
sent his officials to teach the law. He grew greater and built
fortresses.
2 Chronicles 18
Ahab and Jehoshaphat planned for war. Micaiah said, "I saw
Israel scattered. Your prophets are lying." Ahab was killed in
battle.
2 Chronicles 19
Jehoshaphat returned to Jerusalem. He appointed judges
and said to them, "Judge carefully, for with the LORD there
is no injustice."
2 Chronicles 20
An army came against Jehoshaphat so he sought the LORD.
Jahaziel said, "The battle is not yours but God's." The LORD
set ambushes.
2 Chronicles 21
Jehoram ruled and did evil. Elijah wrote saying, "The LORD
will send a plague." The LORD struck Jehoram with a disease
and he died.
2 Chronicles 22
The people made Ahaziah king. He did evil and was killed by
Jehu. Athaliah destroyed the royal family but Jehoshabeath
hid Joash.
2 Chronicles 23
Jehoiada gathered the Levites and anointed the king's son
as king. Athaliah was killed. The people tore down the
temple of Baal.
2 Chronicles 24
Joash ruled and did right while Jehoiada lived. The priests
collected money to repair the temple. Joash was killed by his
servants.
2 Chronicles 25
Amaziah ruled in Jerusalem. After he slaughtered the
Edomites he bowed down to their gods. He challenged
Jehoash and was defeated.
2 Chronicles 26
The people made Uzziah king. He did right and became
powerful. But he went to burn incense on the altar and was
struck with leprosy.
2 Chronicles 27
Jotham became king and did right in the sight of the LORD.
He built fortresses in the hills and conquered the
Ammonites.
2 Chronicles 28
Ahaz became king. He made idols, so the LORD gave him to
Aram and Israel. He shut the LORD's temple and sacrificed
to other gods.
2 Chronicles 29
Hezekiah became king and did right. He told the Levites to
cleanse the temple. He assembled the officials and they
made offerings.
2 Chronicles 30
Hezekiah sent couriers throughout Judah and Israel saying,
"Return to the LORD." Many gathered in Jerusalem to
celebrate Passover.
2 Chronicles 31
Hezekiah assigned the priests and Levites to their duties.
The Israelites gave a tithe. Conaniah was in charge of the
offerings.
2 Chronicles 32
Sennacherib besieged Judah. Hezekiah and Isaiah cried out
to the LORD and the Assyrians were struck dead. Hezekiah
had great riches.
2 Chronicles 33
Manasseh became king. He did much evil and was captured
by the Assyrians. Then he sought the LORD. Amon became
king and did evil.
2 Chronicles 34
Josiah became king. He repaired the temple and had the law
read out. Huldah said, "The LORD says: You will be buried in
peace."
2 Chronicles 35
Josiah celebrated the Passover. He appointed priests to their
duties and provided offerings. Then he attacked Neco and
was killed.
2 Chronicles 36
Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin and Zedekiah ruled. Then
Nebuchadnezzar burned the temple and took Judah captive
for seventy years.
Ezra
Ezra 1
Cyrus said, "Let the LORD's people go up to Jerusalem and
rebuild the temple." He gave the articles from the temple to
Sheshbazzar.
Ezra 2
The exiles returned to Judah with Zerubbabel. A total of
42,360 people returned. The heads of families gave
offerings for the temple.
Ezra 3
The Israelites made regular offerings. When the builders laid
the foundation of the temple, the Levites sang praise to the
LORD.
Ezra 4
Enemies hindered the work in Judah. Rehum wrote to
Artaxerxes: "Jerusalem is a rebellious city." So Artaxerxes
stopped the building.
Ezra 5
Zerubbabel began to build the temple. Tattenai wrote to
Darius: "The elders say that Cyrus issued a decree to rebuild
this temple."
Ezra 6
Darius issued a decree: "The cost of the temple shall come
from the treasury." The temple was completed and the
Israelites celebrated.
Ezra 7
Ezra went up to Jerusalem to teach the law. Artaxerxes
wrote: "I decree that whatever Ezra needs shall be done." So
I was encouraged.
Ezra 8
I assembled the family heads from Babylon and gave the
gifts for the temple to the Levites. We came to Jerusalem
and made offerings.
Ezra 9
The leaders told me that the people had taken foreign
wives. I tore my robe and prayed, "O God, we have forsaken
your commandments."
Ezra 10
The Israelites wept. They all assembled and Ezra said,
"Separate from your foreign wives." The family heads
investigated the matter.
Nehemiah
Nehemiah 1
The words of Nehemiah: Men from Judah said, "The wall of
Jerusalem is broken down." I prayed, "O LORD, give me
favour with the king."
Nehemiah 2
The king granted my request to go and rebuild Jerusalem.
Sanballat was displeased. I inspected the walls and said,
"Let us rebuild."
Nehemiah 3
The priests rebuilt the Sheep Gate, the Tekoites made
repairs, Jedaiah repaired opposite his house, Meremoth
repaired another section.
Nehemiah 4
Sanballat ridiculed us and plotted to attack Jerusalem. So
we prayed and posted a guard. The builders carried swords
as they worked.
Nehemiah 5
The people cried out, "We have to borrow to get grain." I
told the nobles, "Let us stop exacting usury." I did not take
my allowance.
Nehemiah 6
Sanballat and Tobiah sent for me to do me harm. I replied,
"Why should I come?" The wall was finished and our
enemies were afraid.
Nehemiah 7
I gave Hanani and Hananiah charge over Jerusalem. I
registered the nobles, rulers and people by genealogy. The
assembly was 42,360.
Nehemiah 8
The people gathered and Ezra read from the law. Nehemiah
said, "This day is holy. Do not mourn." The people held the
Feast of Booths.
Nehemiah 9
The Israelites confessed. The Levites said, "LORD, you
brought our fathers out of Egypt. They rebelled but you did
not forsake them."
Nehemiah 10
The leaders sealed a covenant. The people made an oath:
"We will not marry foreigners. We will bring the offerings for
the temple."
Nehemiah 11
The leaders and one in ten of the people lived in Jerusalem.
There were descendants of Judah and of Benjamin, priests
and Levites.
Nehemiah 12
All the Levites and leaders gathered to dedicate the wall.
They made offerings and rejoiced. Men were appointed over
the storerooms.
Nehemiah 13
I cleared Tobiah out of the temple. I confronted those who
profaned the Sabbath and who married foreign women.
Remember me, O God.
Esther
Esther 1
King Ahasuerus gave a feast for all his officials. Queen
Vashti refused to come to him, so the wise men advised him
to replace her.
Esther 2
Mordecai raised Esther. She was taken into the king's harem
and was chosen as queen. Mordecai told Esther of a plot
against the king.
Esther 3
Ahasuerus promoted Haman, but Mordecai would not bow to
him. Haman asked to destroy the Jews. The king gave his
seal for the decree.
Esther 4
Mordecai asked Esther to plead with the king. Esther said,
"Hold a fast. I will go to the king against the law, and if I die,
I die."
Esther 5
Esther won favour with the king. She said, "Let the king and
Haman come to a feast tomorrow." Haman built a gallows to
hang Mordecai.
Esther 6
That night the king read about the plot against him. Haman
came to ask about hanging Mordecai. The king told Haman
to honour Mordecai.
Esther 7
At the feast, the king asked Esther, "What is your request?"
She said, "My people have been sold by Haman." The king
had Haman hanged.
Esther 8
The king gave his ring to Mordecai. Mordecai sent letters to
the provinces allowing the Jews to defend themselves. The
Jews rejoiced.
Esther 9
On the day of the king's decree, the Jews destroyed their
enemies. Mordecai wrote to all the Jews and established the
Feast of Purim.
Esther 10
Mordecai the Jew was second only to King Ahasuerus.
Job
Job 1
Job was blameless. The LORD allowed Satan to test him.
Job's servants and children were killed. He tore his robes
and worshipped.
Job 2
Satan struck Job with boils. Job's wife told him to curse God.
But Job did not sin. Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar came to
comfort him.
Job 3
Job said, "Curse the day I was born! Why did I not die at
birth? Why is light given to him who suffers? I have no rest,
only turmoil."
Job 4
Eliphaz said, "Will you become impatient? When did the
innocent ever perish? I heard a voice: 'Can a man be more
righteous than God?'"
Job 5
"Who will answer you? Man is born to trouble. As for me, I
would seek God. Do not despise his discipline. He wounds,
but he binds up."
Job 6
Job said, "My misery would outweigh the sand of the seas!
You have proved no help. Show me how I have been wrong!
Would I lie to you?"
Job 7
"O God, my life is but a breath! Therefore I will speak out.
What is man, that you examine him? Why have you set me
as your target?"
Job 8
Bildad said, "Does God pervert justice? Learn from past
generations. He will not reject the blameless, nor will he
uphold evildoers."
Job 9
Job said, "How can a man dispute with God? His power is
vast! But he destroys the innocent. If only there were a
mediator between us!"
Job 10
"God, why do you reject the work of your hands? You know
that I am not guilty! Why did you bring me out of the womb?
Leave me alone."
Job 11
Zophar said, "Should your babble go unanswered? God
exacts less than your guilt deserves! Reach out to him and
you will find hope."
Job 12
Job said, "Who does not know all these things? With God are
wisdom and power. He brings darkness into light. He
destroys nations."
Job 13
"I want to argue my case with God. Be quiet and I will speak.
Though he slay me, I will hope in him. God, why do you hide
your face?"
Job 14
"Man is like a fleeting shadow. If a tree is cut down, it will
sprout again, but will a man live again? You overpower him
forever."
Job 15
Eliphaz said, "Your own mouth condemns you! Why do you
turn against God? The wicked will be like a vine stripped of
unripe grapes."
Job 16
Job said, "You're miserable comforters! God has torn me and
shattered me. But my prayer is pure. Even now, my
advocate is on high!"
Job 17
"My spirit is broken. He has made me a byword. But come
again all of you! I will not find a wise man among you.
Where is my hope?"
Job 18
Bildad said, "Why are we stupid in your sight? Indeed, the
light of the wicked goes out. His roots dry up and his
branches wither."
Job 19
Job said, "How long will you torment me? God counts me as
an enemy. My closest friends abhor me. But I know that my
redeemer lives!"
Job 20
Zophar said, "My understanding inspires me to answer. The
triumph of the wicked is short. His food will turn sour in his
stomach."
Job 21
Job said, "Listen to me. Why do the wicked grow mighty?
How often do they have trouble? Who repays them? Your
answers are empty!"
Job 22
Eliphaz said, "Is not your wickedness great? You withheld
bread from the hungry. Is not God high? Submit to him and
be at peace."
Job 23
Job said, "If only I knew where to find God! When he has
tested me, I shall come forth as gold. But he does whatever
he pleases."
Job 24
"The wounded cry out, but God charges no one with wrong.
Some rebel against the light; they are exalted a while, and
then are gone."
Job 25
Bildad said, "Dominion and awe belong to God. Who can be
righteous before him? Even the stars are not pure in his
sight!"
Job 26
Job said, "How you have helped the weak! Sheol is naked to
God. The pillars of heaven tremble. These are the fringes of
his ways!"
Job 27
"My heart does not reproach me. Let my enemy be as the
wicked! His many sons are for the sword. The wind sweeps
him from his place."
Job 28
"There is a mine for silver, but where is wisdom found? It is
hidden from the eyes of all living. The fear of the Lord is
wisdom!"
Job 29
"Oh, for the days when God watched over me! When I took
my seat in the square. I was father to the needy and
comforted the mourners."
Job 30
"But now younger men mock me. They do not hesitate to
spit at me. God has cast me into the mire. When I expected
good, evil came."
Job 31
"Does God not see my ways? Have I lied? Have I refused to
help the poor? Have I put my trust in money? Let the
Almighty answer me!"
Job 32
Elihu was angry with Job and his three friends. He said, "I
am young, but it is not only the old who are wise. I will have
my say."
Job 33
"Job, please listen to my words. God does speak, perhaps in
a dream or through pain. He does this to deliver a person
from the pit."
Job 34
"It is unthinkable that God would do wrong. Can one who
hates justice govern? God shows no partiality. Job speaks
like the wicked!"
Job 35
"Even if you are righteous, what do you give to God? He
does not answer because of the pride of evil men. You must
wait for him!"
Job 36
"I have more to say on God's behalf. He is mighty but does
not despise any. Who is a teacher like him? Remember to
extol his work!"
Job 37
"God thunders with his voice. By the breath of God, ice is
made. Do you know his wondrous works? He is great in
power and justice!"
Job 38
Then the LORD said, "I will question you. Where were you
when I founded the earth? Who enclosed the sea? Can you
bind the Pleiades?"
Job 39
"Do you mark when the deer is born? Will the wild ox serve
you? Do you give the horse his might? Does the hawk fly by
your wisdom?"
Job 40
Job said, "I have no answer." The LORD said, "Will you
condemn me? Behold now, Behemoth, which I made. Can
anyone pierce his nose?"
Job 41
"Can you catch Leviathan with a hook? Everything under
heaven is mine. His breath sets coals ablaze. He is king over
all the proud."
Job 42
Job said, "I repent in ashes." The LORD said to Eliphaz, "You
have not spoken rightly of me, as Job has." He restored Job's
fortunes.
Psalms
Psalms 1
Blessed is the man who does not walk with the wicked,
whose delight is in the law of the LORD. He is like a tree
planted by the water.
Psalms 2
Why do the rulers plot against the LORD and his anointed?
The LORD laughs! He said to me, "You are my son." O kings,
fear the LORD!
Psalms 3
O LORD, how many are my foes! But you are a shield around
me. You have broken the teeth of the wicked. Salvation
belongs to the LORD!
Psalms 4
Answer me when I call, O God! O people, how long will you
seek lies? Put your trust in the LORD! O LORD, you make me
sleep in safety.
Psalms 5
Hear my cry, O LORD! You hate all evildoers. Lead me in
righteousness because of my enemies. Let all who take
refuge in you rejoice!
Psalms 6
Be merciful to me, O LORD! My soul is in anguish. I flood my
bed with tears. Depart from me, you evildoers! The LORD
has heard my cry.
Psalms 7
O LORD, save me from all who pursue me. Arise in
judgement! God has prepared his weapons against the
wicked. I will praise the LORD!
Psalms 8
O LORD, how majestic is your name in all the earth! What is
man that you care for him? Yet you have crowned him with
glory and honour.
Psalms 9
I will praise you, O LORD! You have rebuked the nations. The
LORD will judge the world with justice. The needy will not be
forgotten.
Psalms 10
O LORD, why do you stand far off? The wicked man hunts
the weak. He says, "God will never see." O God, break the
arm of the wicked!
Psalms 11
In the LORD I take refuge. How can you say, "Flee like a
bird"? The LORD hates the wicked. The LORD is righteous
and loves justice.
Psalms 12
Help, O LORD, for the godly are no more. Everyone lies. "I
will protect the weak," says the LORD. The words of the
LORD are pure.
Psalms 13
How long, O LORD? Will you forget me forever? Look on me
and answer! Give light to my eyes. But I will trust in your
unfailing love.
Psalms 14
The fool says in his heart, "There is no God." There is no one
who does good. Will evildoers never learn? God is with the
righteous.
Psalms 15
LORD, who may dwell in your sanctuary? He whose walk is
blameless, who does not slander, who keeps his oath even
when it hurts.
Psalms 16
Protect me, O God! I have no good besides you. The LORD is
my portion. I will not be shaken. In your presence is fullness
of joy!
Psalms 17
Hear a just cause, O LORD. My steps have held to your
paths. Hide me in the shadow of your wings. Deliver my life
from the wicked.
Psalms 18
The LORD is my rock. I called and he thundered from
heaven. He rescued me from my enemy. I will praise you
among the nations, O LORD!
Psalms 19
The heavens declare the glory of God. The law of the LORD
is perfect, making wise the simple. May my words be
pleasing to you, O LORD.
Psalms 20
May the LORD answer you in the day of trouble! May he
remember your offerings. The LORD saves his anointed. We
rise up and stand firm!
Psalms 21
O LORD, the king rejoices in your strength! You set a crown
upon his head. You will destroy your enemies. We will praise
your power!
Psalms 22
My God, why have you forsaken me? I am despised. They
have pierced my hands. You have answered me! The nations
will worship the LORD!
Psalms 23
The LORD is my shepherd. He leads me in paths of
righteousness. I will fear no evil. I will dwell in the house of
the LORD forever.
Psalms 24
The earth is the LORD's! He who has a pure heart will
receive blessing. Lift up your heads, O gates! The King of
glory shall come in.
Psalms 25
To you, O LORD, I lift up my soul. Show me your ways, teach
me your paths. Be gracious to me, forgive my sins. I take
refuge in you.
Psalms 26
Vindicate me, O LORD, for I have walked with integrity. I do
not sit with deceitful men. I love the place where your glory
dwells.
Psalms 27
The LORD is my light and my salvation. My heart will not
fear. I will seek your face, O LORD; do not forsake me! Wait
for the LORD.
Psalms 28
To you I cry, O LORD my rock. Repay the wicked according to
their works! The LORD is my shield. He is the strength of his
people.
Psalms 29
Ascribe to the LORD glory! The voice of the LORD is over the
waters. The voice of the LORD shakes the wilderness. The
LORD is king!
Psalms 30
I will exalt you, O LORD, for you spared me from going down
to the pit. I cried to you for mercy. You turned my mourning
into dancing.
Psalms 31
In you, O LORD, I seek refuge. Into your hand I commit my
spirit. Deliver me from my enemies. Praise the LORD for his
steadfast love!
Psalms 32
Blessed are those whose sins are forgiven. When I kept
silent, my bones wasted away. You surround me with glad
cries of deliverance!
Psalms 33
Rejoice in the LORD! Make melody, play skilfully. Let all the
earth fear the LORD. His eye is on those who hope in his
steadfast love.
Psalms 34
O magnify the LORD with me! I sought him and he
answered. Taste and see that the LORD is good. He is close
to the brokenhearted.
Psalms 35
O LORD, fight against those who fight against me! Then I
will rejoice. They repay evil for good. Vindicate me in your
righteousness!
Psalms 36
The wicked flatter themselves. Your love, O LORD, reaches
to the heavens. In your light we see light. There the
evildoers lie fallen.
Psalms 37
Do not be envious of evildoers, for they will fade like the
grass. The righteous will inherit the earth. The LORD is their
stronghold.
Psalms 38
O LORD, your arrows have pierced me! My guilt has
overwhelmed me. My strength fails me. I confess my sin. Do
not forsake me, my God!
Psalms 39
When I was silent, my anguish increased. O LORD, what is
the measure of my days? My hope is in you. Deliver me from
my transgressions.
Psalms 40
I waited patiently for the LORD. He drew me up from the pit.
I delight to do your will, O God. My heart fails me, but you
are my help.
Psalms 41
Blessed are those who consider the weak. My enemies say,
"When will he die?" They gather slander. But you, O LORD,
have upheld me.
Psalms 42
As the deer pants for water, so my soul longs for you, O
God. Your waves break over me. Why are you downcast, O
my soul? Hope in God.
Psalms 43
Vindicate me, O God. Why have you rejected me? Send forth
your light and your truth. Why are you downcast, O my
soul? Hope in God.
Psalms 44
O God, our fathers have told us how you drove out the
nations. But now you have sold your people. Awake, O Lord!
Rise up and help us.
Psalms 45
My heart overflows with verses for the king. Your God has
anointed you with gladness. All glorious is the princess in
her chamber.
Psalms 46
God is our refuge. We will not fear, though the earth give
way. The nations rage, kingdoms fall. "Be still and know that
I am God."
Psalms 47
Clap your hands, you nations. How awesome is the LORD
Most High! Sing praises to our God, sing praises. He is king
of all the earth.
Psalms 48
Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised! The joy of the
whole earth is Mount Zion. O God, we ponder your love in
your temple.
Psalms 49
Hear this, all peoples! Man in his pomp will not endure. He is
like the beasts that perish. But God will ransom my soul
from Sheol.
Psalms 50
The Mighty One, God the LORD speaks: "I will not accept
bulls and goats. For you hate discipline. Offer a sacrifice of
thanksgiving."
Psalms 51
Have mercy on me, O God! Cleanse me from my sin. Do not
cast me away from your presence. A broken heart, O God,
you will not despise.
Psalms 52
Why do you boast of evil, O mighty man? Surely God will
bring you down to ruin. But I am like a green olive tree in
the house of God.
Psalms 53
The fool says in his heart, "There is no God." There is no one
who does good. Will evildoers never learn? God has rejected
them.
Psalms 54
Save me, O God! For strangers have risen against me. God
is my helper. He will repay my enemies. I will praise your
name, O LORD!
Psalms 55
Give ear to my prayer, O God. My heart is in anguish. It is
my equal, my friend who rises against me! Cast your burden
on the LORD.
Psalms 56
Be gracious to me, O God, for my enemies trample on me.
Are my tears not in your book? In God, whose word I praise,
in God I trust.
Psalms 57
Be merciful to me, O God. I am in the midst of lions. My
heart is steadfast, for great is your love. Be exalted above
the heavens!
Psalms 58
Do you rulers judge justly? No, you mete out violence. O
God, break their teeth! The righteous will rejoice when they
see vengeance.
Psalms 59
Deliver me from my enemies, O God. Each evening they
return, howling like dogs. Destroy them in wrath! You, O
God, are my fortress.
Psalms 60
O God, you have rejected us, broken us. Now restore us!
God has promised: "Judah is my sceptre." O grant us help
against the enemy!
Psalms 61
Hear my cry, O God! Lead me to the rock that is higher than
I. Prolong the life of the king. So I will ever sing praise to
your name.
Psalms 62
My soul waits for God alone. He alone is my rock and my
salvation. Trust in him at all times, O people. Power and love
belong to God.
Psalms 63
O God, you are my God. My soul thirsts for you. Your love is
better than life. My lips will sing your praise. Liars will be
silenced.
Psalms 64
Hear me, O God! Hide me from the plots of the wicked, who
ambush the blameless. God will bring them to ruin. Let the
upright be glad!
Psalms 65
Praise awaits you, O God, in Zion. By awesome deeds you
answer us. You silence the roaring seas. You crown the year
with abundance.
Psalms 66
Shout for joy to God! Come and see what he has done. He
has not let our feet slip. I will make an offering. God has
heard my prayer.
Psalms 67
May God be gracious to us, and make his face to shine upon
us. Let the peoples praise you, O God! The earth has yielded
its increase.
Psalms 68
Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered! Kings and
armies flee. Our God is a God who saves. Sing to him, O
kingdoms of the earth!
Psalms 69
Save me, O God! I endure scorn for your sake. Rescue me
from the mire. My foes are all known to you. Let your
salvation protect me!
Psalms 70
Make haste to help me, O God! May those who seek my life
be put to shame. May all who seek you rejoice. O LORD, do
not delay.
Psalms 71
In you, O LORD, I take refuge. Do not forsake me when my
strength fails. I will tell of your righteousness. I will praise
you, O God.
Psalms 72
Give the king your justice, O God. May he defend the cause
of the poor. May all kings fall down before him. Blessed be
the LORD!
Psalms 73
Surely God is good to the pure in heart. I envied the wicked
until I saw their end. They are swept away. God is my
portion forever.
Psalms 74
O God, why have you rejected us? Foes have defiled your
sanctuary. How long will they mock? You are king from of
old. Rise up, O God!
Psalms 75
We give thanks to you, O God. "I say to the boastful, 'Do not
boast.'" God is the judge. The wicked will drain the dregs of
his cup.
Psalms 76
God is known in Judah. You are glorious, more majestic than
the mountains. The earth feared and was still when God
arose to judgement.
Psalms 77
In the day of trouble I sought the LORD. Has he withdrawn
his compassion? You are the God of wonders. Your path led
through the sea.
Psalms 78
God worked miracles in Egypt. He brought his people to the
holy land. They rebelled and he rejected them. He chose
David to tend them.
Psalms 79
O God, the nations have invaded and shed blood like water.
How long, O LORD? Save us for your name's sake. Make
your vengeance known!
Psalms 80
Hear us, O Shepherd of Israel! How long will you be angry?
Restore us, O God. Watch over the vine that you planted.
Restore us, O God.
Psalms 81
Sing aloud to God our strength. I hear a voice: "I am the
LORD. Oh, that my people would listen to me! I would
subdue their enemies."
Psalms 82
God judges among the gods: "How long will you judge
unjustly? Defend the weak. You are all gods, but you shall
die." Arise, O God!
Psalms 83
O God, do not keep silent! Your enemies make plans against
your people. Edom, Moab, Amalek and Philistia. Let them be
put to shame.
Psalms 84
How lovely is your dwelling place, O LORD! A day in your
courts is better than a thousand elsewhere. For the LORD is
a sun and shield.
Psalms 85
O LORD, you forgave the iniquity of your people. Restore us
again! Surely his salvation is at hand. Love and faithfulness
will meet.
Psalms 86
Hear, O LORD, and answer me. Save your servant! You alone
are God. I will glorify your name forever. Show me a sign of
your favour.
Psalms 87
Glorious things are spoken of you, O city of God. The LORD
will write in the register of the peoples: "This one was born
in Zion."
Psalms 88
O LORD, day and night I cry out to you. You have put me in
the darkest depths. Do the dead rise up to praise you? I am
in despair.
Psalms 89
I will sing of the mercies of the LORD. You said, "I will
establish the throne of David forever." O Lord, where is your
love of old?
Psalms 90
Lord, you have been our dwelling place. All our days pass
away under your wrath. Return, O LORD! Have compassion
on your servants!
Psalms 91
I will say of the LORD, "My refuge and my fortress." His
faithfulness will be your shield. He will command his angels
to guard you.
Psalms 92
It is good to give thanks to the LORD. How great are your
works! Your enemies shall perish. The righteous flourish in
your courts.
Psalms 93
The LORD reigns! Your throne is established from of old. The
LORD is mightier than the sea. Holiness adorns your house
forever.
Psalms 94
O LORD, God of vengeance, shine forth! How long will the
wicked exult? The LORD will not reject his people. He will
repay the corrupt.
Psalms 95
Oh come, let us sing to the LORD! He is the King above all
gods. Oh come, let us worship and bow down! Do not
harden your hearts.
Psalms 96
Sing to the LORD! Declare his glory among the nations.
Worship the LORD in holy splendour. He will judge the world
in righteousness.
Psalms 97
The LORD reigns, let the earth rejoice! Fire goes before him.
The heavens declare his righteousness. Give thanks to his
holy name!
Psalms 98
Sing to the LORD! He has remembered his steadfast love.
Make a joyful noise before the King. He will judge the world
in righteousness.
Psalms 99
The LORD reigns, let the nations tremble! The King loves
justice. He spoke from the pillar of cloud. The LORD our God
is holy!
Psalms 100
Shout for joy to the LORD, all the earth! Know that the LORD
is God. Enter his courts with praise. For his love endures
forever.
Psalms 101
I will sing of justice, O LORD. I will walk with integrity. My
eyes will be on the faithful of the land. I will destroy the
wicked.
Psalms 102
Hear my prayer, O LORD; I wither away like grass. You sit
enthroned forever. The heavens will perish, but your years
have no end.
Psalms 103
Bless the LORD, O my soul. He forgives all your iniquity. He
has compassion on those who fear him. Bless the LORD, all
his works!
Psalms 104
O LORD, you are very great. You set the earth on its
foundations. All your creatures look to you for food. Bless
the LORD, O my soul!
Psalms 105
Give thanks to the LORD! He has remembered his covenant.
He sent Moses to perform signs. He brought his people out
of Egypt with joy.
Psalms 106
The LORD is good! We have sinned like our fathers. They
forgot their God. They served idols. But the LORD
remembered his covenant.
Psalms 107
Oh give thanks to the LORD! Let the redeemed say so. He
brought them out of darkness. He stilled the storm. He
raises up the needy.
Psalms 108
My heart is steadfast, O God. Your love is great above the
heavens. God has spoken: "Judah is my sceptre." Help us
against the enemy!
Psalms 109
Do not be silent, O God. For wicked mouths speak against
me. May his name be blotted out! Let curses come upon
him! Help me, O LORD.
Psalms 110
The LORD says to my Lord: "Sit at my right hand. You are a
priest in the order of Melchizedek." The Lord will judge the
nations.
Psalms 111
Praise the Lord! Great are his works. He is ever mindful of
his covenant. All his precepts are sure. His praise endures
forever.
Psalms 112
Blessed are those who fear the LORD. Their righteousness
endures forever. They are not afraid of evil tidings. The
wicked melt away.
Psalms 113
Praise the LORD! Blessed be the name of the LORD forever.
He is exalted over all the nations. He lifts the needy from
the ash heap.
Psalms 114
When Israel came out of Egypt, Judah became God's
sanctuary. The sea looked and fled. Tremble, O earth, at the
presence of the Lord.
Psalms 115
Not to us, O LORD, but to your name give glory. Idols have
eyes, but they cannot see. O Israel, trust in the LORD. He
will bless us.
Psalms 116
I love the LORD, for he heard my cry. When I was brought
low, he saved me. What can I give for all his goodness? I will
keep my vows.
Psalms 117
Praise the LORD! For great is his love towards us.
Psalms 118
Give thanks to the LORD; for his love endures forever! The
nations surrounded me; I cut them off! The LORD has
become my salvation.
Psalms 119
Blessed are those who walk in the law of the LORD. Teach
me your decrees. I love your commands. Deliver me
according to your promise.
Psalms 120
In my distress I cry to the LORD. Deliver me from a deceitful
tongue. Woe to me! Too long have I lived among those who
hate peace.
Psalms 121
I lift up my eyes to the hills; my help comes from the LORD.
He who keeps you will not slumber. The LORD will keep you
from all evil.
Psalms 122
I was glad when they said, "Let us go to the house of the
LORD!" The tribes go up to give thanks. Pray for the peace
of Jerusalem.
Psalms 123
As the eyes of servants look to their master, so our eyes
look to the LORD. Have mercy on us! For we have endured
much contempt.
Psalms 124
If the LORD had not been on our side, attackers would have
swallowed us alive. We have escaped. Our help is in the
name of the LORD.
Psalms 125
Those who trust in the LORD are like Mount Zion, which
cannot be moved. Do good, O LORD, to those who are good.
Peace be upon Israel.
Psalms 126
When the LORD brought back the captives, we were like
dreamers. He has done great things. Those who sow in tears
shall reap in joy.
Psalms 127
Unless the LORD builds the house, the builders labour in
vain. Children are a heritage from the LORD, the fruit of the
womb a reward.
Psalms 128
Blessed are all who fear the LORD. You will eat the fruit of
your labour. May the LORD bless you from Zion all the days
of your life.
Psalms 129
They have greatly oppressed me from my youth. But the
LORD has cut the cords of the wicked. May all who hate Zion
be put to shame!
Psalms 130
I cry to you, O LORD! If you kept a record of sins, who could
stand? But with you there is forgiveness. O Israel, hope in
the LORD!
Psalms 131
My heart is not proud, O LORD. I have quietened my soul,
like a weaned child with its mother. O Israel, put your hope
in the LORD.
Psalms 132
Remember, O LORD, how David vowed, "I will find a place
for the LORD." The LORD has chosen Zion: "This is my
resting place forever."
Psalms 133
How good it is when brothers live together in unity! It is like
precious oil upon the head. There the LORD commanded his
blessing.
Psalms 134
Come, bless the LORD, all you servants of the LORD! Lift up
your hands to the sanctuary. May the LORD bless you from
Zion.
Psalms 135
Praise the LORD! He is above all gods. He struck down many
nations. Their idols are but silver and gold. O Israel, bless
the LORD!
Psalms 136
Give thanks to the LORD, his love endures; who spread out
the earth, his love endures; who led Israel out of Egypt, his
love endures.
Psalms 137
By the rivers of Babylon, we wept when we remembered
Zion. How can we sing the LORD's song? O Babylon, happy
the one who repays you!
Psalms 138
I give you thanks, O LORD! All the kings of the earth will
praise you. Though I walk in the midst of trouble, you
preserve my life.
Psalms 139
O LORD, you have known me. Where can I go from your
Spirit? You knit me together in my mother's womb. Search
me and know my heart.
Psalms 140
Rescue me, O LORD, from evildoers; protect me from the
violent. You are my God, my salvation. The LORD executes
justice for the poor.
Psalms 141
O LORD, may my prayer be as incense. Do not turn my
heart to evil. Let the righteous rebuke me. Keep me from the
traps of the wicked.
Psalms 142
I cry out to the LORD! When my spirit is faint, you know my
path. Save me from my persecutors! You will deal
bountifully with me.
Psalms 143
Hear my prayer, O LORD! My enemy has crushed my life. My
soul thirsts for you. Teach me the way I should go. Destroy
my adversaries.
Psalms 144
Blessed be the LORD, who trains my hands for war. O LORD,
reach down and rescue me! May there be no cry of distress
in our streets.
Psalms 145
I will exalt you, my God and King. All you have made will
praise you. The LORD is faithful. He is near to all who call
upon him.
Psalms 146
Praise the LORD, O my soul! Do not trust in mortal men. The
LORD executes justice for the oppressed. He watches over
the fatherless.
Psalms 147
It is good to sing praises to our God! He counts the stars. He
lifts up the humble. Praise the LORD! He declares his word
to Israel.
Psalms 148
Praise the LORD from the heavens! Praise him, sun and
moon! Praise the LORD from the earth! Young and old
together, praise the LORD!
Psalms 149
Praise the LORD! Let Israel rejoice in their maker. The LORD
takes delight in his people. Let swords be in their hands for
judgement.
Psalms 150
Praise the LORD! Praise him with trumpet and strings! Praise
him with loud cymbals! Let everything that has breath
praise the LORD!
Proverbs
Proverbs 1
The proverbs of Solomon. My son, if sinners entice you, do
not consent. Wisdom calls aloud. The complacency of fools
destroys them.
Proverbs 2
My son, apply your heart to understanding. For the LORD
gives wisdom. It will save you from the way of evil, and from
the adulteress.
Proverbs 3
My son, trust in the LORD with all your heart. Do not despise
his discipline. Wisdom is a tree of life. Do not quarrel without
cause.
Proverbs 4
Listen, my sons: Get wisdom. The path of the righteous is
like the morning sun. Guard your heart, for it is the
wellspring of life.
Proverbs 5
My son, listen to my words. In the end an adulteress is bitter
as wormwood. Keep away from her. Rejoice in the wife of
your youth.
Proverbs 6
A little slumber, and poverty will come like a bandit. A
scoundrel sows discord. My son, a man who commits
adultery destroys himself.
Proverbs 7
My son, wisdom will keep you from the adulteress. I saw her
seducing a young man. He followed her like an ox going to
the slaughter.
Proverbs 8
Wisdom cries aloud: "My mouth speaks truth. The LORD
brought me forth at the beginning of his works. Whoever
finds me finds life."
Proverbs 9
Wisdom has built her house. She says, "Come, leave your
folly." The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom. Folly
knows nothing.
Proverbs 10
A wise son makes a glad father. Love covers all offences.
With many words, sin is not lacking. The righteous will never
be uprooted.
Proverbs 11
The LORD hates dishonest scales. The wicked earn false
wages. Whoever gives water will get water. Whoever trusts
in riches will fall.
Proverbs 12
No one finds security by wickedness. Those who work the
land have food. Rash words pierce like a sword.
Righteousness leads to life.
Proverbs 13
The righteous hate lies. Hope deferred makes the heart sick.
Whoever heeds reproof is honoured. Whoever spares the
rod hates his son.
Proverbs 14
The talk of fools is a rod for their backs. Even in laughter the
heart may ache. Those who oppress the poor insult their
Maker.
Proverbs 15
A gentle answer turns away wrath. The eyes of the LORD
are everywhere. Plans fail for lack of counsel. The LORD
hears the righteous.
Proverbs 16
A man plans his way, but the LORD directs his steps. Kings
detest evil. Pride goes before destruction. Wisdom is a
fountain of life.
Proverbs 17
A wise servant will rule over a shameful son. Starting a
quarrel is like breaching a dam. Even a fool seems wise if he
keeps silent.
Proverbs 18
A fool delights in his own opinions. The name of LORD is a
strong tower. A gift opens the way. The tongue can bring life
or death.
Proverbs 19
Wealth makes friends. A false witness will not go
unpunished. A good wife is from the LORD. Whoever helps
the poor lends to the LORD.
Proverbs 20
Wine is a mocker, beer a brawler. Even a child is known by
his deeds. The LORD hates false weights. It is a snare to
make rash vows.
Proverbs 21
To do justice is better than sacrifice. Better to live on the
roof than with a quarrelsome wife. No plans can avail
against the LORD.
Proverbs 22
A good name is better than riches. Train a child and he will
not go astray. Incline your ear and apply your heart to my
teaching.
Proverbs 23
Do not wear yourself out to get rich. Do not move a
boundary marker. Buy the truth, and do not sell it. Do not
linger long over wine.
Proverbs 24
Do not envy the wicked. Wisdom is sweet to the soul. Fear
the LORD and the king, my son. I saw thorns in the field of
the sluggard.
Proverbs 25
Do not exalt yourself in the king's presence. If your enemy is
hungry, give him food to eat. To seek one's own glory is not
glory.
Proverbs 26
As a dog returns to its vomit, so a fool repeats his folly.
Without gossip a quarrel dies down. Whoever digs a pit will
fall into it.
Proverbs 27
Faithful are the wounds of a friend. A loud blessing in the
morning will be taken as a curse. A person is tested by
being praised.
Proverbs 28
Better to be poor and honest than crooked and rich.
Whoever confesses sins will find mercy. Whoever trusts in
the LORD will prosper.
Proverbs 29
By justice a king builds up the land. Whether a fool rages or
laughs, there is no peace. Correct your son and he will give
you rest.
Proverbs 30
Every word of God is pure. Give me neither poverty nor
riches. Four things are never satisfied: Sheol, a barren
womb, earth and fire.
Proverbs 31
Speak up for the speechless. Who can find an excellent
wife? She buys a field, she makes garments, she watches
over her household.
Ecclesiastes
Ecclesiastes 1
Everything is meaningless! There is nothing new under the
sun. I applied my heart to know wisdom, but much wisdom
brings much sorrow.
Ecclesiastes 2
I built houses, gathered possessions and sought pleasure. It
was meaningless! The wise die like the foolish. I despaired
of my toil.
Ecclesiastes 3
There is a time for everything: to live, to die, to mourn, to
dance. It is the gift of God that man should find pleasure in
his work.
Ecclesiastes 4
I saw the tears of the oppressed. Two have a good reward
for their toil. I saw everyone follow a new king. This too is
meaningless!
Ecclesiastes 5
Do not make rash vows before God. The lover of money
never has enough. What is gained by toil? It is good to find
enjoyment in life.
Ecclesiastes 6
Here is an evil: to have wealth and honour but not to enjoy
them. What do the wise gain over fools? The more words,
the less meaning.
Ecclesiastes 7
The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning. Do not be
too righteous, or too wicked. Men have gone in search of
many schemes.
Ecclesiastes 8
Obey the king's command. Though sinners do evil, it will be
well for those who fear God. No one can know what goes on
under the sun.
Ecclesiastes 9
The same fate comes to all. A living dog is better than a
dead lion. Enjoy the days of your vain life. Wisdom is better
than strength.
Ecclesiastes 10
A little folly spoils wisdom. Whoever digs a pit will fall into it.
The lips of a fool consume him. Through laziness the roof
leaks.
Ecclesiastes 11
Whoever watches the clouds will never reap. You do not
know what will prosper. Enjoy your youth, but know that God
will judge you.
Ecclesiastes 12
Remember your Creator in your youth, before the days of
trouble come. Everything is meaningless! Fear God and
keep his commandments.
Song of Songs
Song of Songs 1
Let him kiss me! I am dark and lovely. Tell me, where do you
pasture your flock? Follow the tracks, my love. Behold, you
are beautiful.
Song of Songs 2
She is a lily among thorns. He is an apple tree in the wood.
Here he comes, leaping on the mountains. My beloved is
mine and I am his.
Song of Songs 3
By night I sought the one whom I love. I brought him into
my mother's house. Behold, O daughters of Zion, the
carriage of King Solomon!
Song of Songs 4
You are beautiful, my love! Your eyes are doves, your
breasts are like fawns. My bride is a garden. Let my beloved
come to his garden.
Song of Songs 5
My beloved is knocking! I opened to him but he had gone.
The guards found me and wounded me. My beloved is
ruddy, his body is ivory.
Song of Songs 6
Where has your beloved gone? He has gone to his garden.
You are beautiful, my love. Fair as the moon, awesome as an
army with banners.
Song of Songs 7
Your thighs are like jewels, your breasts like the fruit of a
palm. May your kisses be like wine! Beloved, let us go into
the fields.
Song of Songs 8
Do not awaken love until it pleases. Love is as strong as
death. Solomon had a vineyard, but mine is my own. Make
haste, my beloved!
Isaiah
Isaiah 1
The LORD has spoken: I raised children but they have
rebelled. Wash yourselves. I will smelt away your dross. Zion
shall be redeemed.
Isaiah 2
The mountain of the LORD will be established. On that day
the pride of men will be humbled. They will flee the
splendour of the LORD.
Isaiah 3
The LORD will take away all support from Judah. Children
will govern. You grind the faces of the poor. The women of
Zion are proud.
Isaiah 4
In that day the branch of the LORD will be glorious. Those
who are left in Zion will be called holy. The LORD will create
a shelter.
Isaiah 5
Why did my vineyard yield wild grapes? Woe to those who
pursue drink, who call evil good. The anger of the LORD is
against his people.
Isaiah 6
I saw the LORD seated on high. A seraph brought a coal to
my lips. The LORD said, "Who will go for us?" I said, "Here
am I; send me!"
Isaiah 7
Aram plotted with Ephraim. The LORD sent Isaiah to King
Ahaz: Behold, a virgin shall bear a son. The LORD will use
Assyria as a razor.
Isaiah 8
The floodwaters of Assyria will overflow the land. Many will
fall and be snared. I will trust in the LORD. They will curse
their gods.
Isaiah 9
A child is born to us. His government will increase forever.
The LORD will raise the enemies of Israel. His anger has not
turned away.
Isaiah 10
Woe to those who rob the poor of justice. Woe to Assyria,
whose purpose is to destroy. The remnant of Israel will
return to the LORD.
Isaiah 11
A shoot will come up from Jesse. He will judge with
righteousness. The wolf will live with the lamb. The Lord will
gather his people.
Isaiah 12
In that day you will say: I will praise you, O LORD! Your
anger has turned away. Surely God is my salvation. Sing for
joy, O Zion!
Isaiah 13
The oracle concerning Babylon: Listen! The LORD is calling
an army. I will punish the world for its evil. Babylon will be
overthrown.
Isaiah 14
The LORD will again choose Israel. How you are fallen, O
Lucifer! You will be cast away like a trampled corpse. Wail, O
Philistia!
Isaiah 15
An oracle concerning Moab: Ar of Moab is laid waste. In the
streets they wear sackcloth. The waters of Dibon are full of
blood.
Isaiah 16
A throne will be established from the house of David. We
have heard of the pride of Moab. Within three years Moab
will be despised.
Isaiah 17
An oracle concerning Damascus: Damascus will become
ruins. Jacob will be brought low. You have forgotten the God
of your salvation.
Isaiah 18
Woe to the land of buzzing wings, beyond the rivers of Cush.
The LORD will cut down the branches. Wild animals will feed
on them.
Isaiah 19
An oracle concerning Egypt: I will hand the Egyptians over
to a cruel master. When they cry out to the LORD, he will
send a saviour.
Isaiah 20
The LORD spoke through Isaiah: As Isaiah has gone stripped
for three years, so Assyria will lead the Egyptians and
Cushites captive.
Isaiah 21
The oracle concerning the wilderness of the sea: I set a
watchman. He said, "Fallen, fallen is Babylon!" The glory of
Kedar will end.
Isaiah 22
The oracle concerning the valley of vision: The LORD has
taken away the covering of Judah. I will give to Eliakim the
key of David.
Isaiah 23
The oracle concerning Tyre: Wail, O ships, for Tyre is laid
waste. The LORD has planned it. Tyre will be forgotten for
seventy years.
Isaiah 24
Behold, the LORD lays the earth waste. Its people are held
guilty. Fear and pit and snare await you. The LORD of hosts
will reign.
Isaiah 25
O LORD, I will praise you. You have done marvellous things.
The LORD will swallow up death forever. Moab will be
trampled as straw.
Isaiah 26
A song will be sung in Judah: The LORD is the eternal Rock.
Your hand is lifted high. We gave birth to wind, but your
dead will rise.
Isaiah 27
In that day the LORD will slay Leviathan. By exile the guilt of
Jacob will be purged. Those who were perishing will worship
the LORD.
Isaiah 28
Woe to the drunkards of Ephraim! They will be snared.
Behold, I lay in Zion a precious cornerstone. The LORD will
do his alien work.
Isaiah 29
Woe to Ariel, the city of David! But your enemies will be like
dust. I will astound these people. No longer will Jacob be
ashamed.
Isaiah 30
Woe to the stubborn children who seek help from Egypt! The
LORD will wait to show mercy. The voice of the LORD will
shatter Assyria.
Isaiah 31
Woe to those who trust in chariots! As a lion roars, so the
LORD will come down to fight for Mount Zion. Turn back to
him, O Israel.
Isaiah 32
Behold, a king will reign in righteousness. Tremble, you
women of ease. The city will be deserted until the Spirit is
poured upon us.
Isaiah 33
Woe to you, O destroyer! The fear of the LORD is Zion's
treasure. "I will arise," says the LORD. You will see the king
in his beauty.
Isaiah 34
The LORD is enraged against the nations. His sword is filled
with blood. He has a day of vengeance for Zion. Edom shall
lie waste.
Isaiah 35
The desert shall rejoice and bloom. The eyes of the blind
shall be opened. The ransomed of the LORD shall return to
Zion with songs.
Isaiah 36
The king of Assyria came against Judah. His commander
said, "Do not listen to Hezekiah. Have any of the gods
delivered their lands?"
Isaiah 37
Hezekiah prayed to the LORD. Isaiah said, "The king of
Assyria will not enter the city." The angel of the LORD struck
the Assyrians.
Isaiah 38
Hezekiah became sick, so he prayed. The LORD said, "I will
add fifteen years to your life." Hezekiah wrote, "The LORD
will save me."
Isaiah 39
The king of Babylon sent envoys. Hezekiah showed them his
treasure houses. Isaiah said, "All you have shall be carried
to Babylon."
Isaiah 40
Comfort, comfort my people. A voice cries: Prepare the way
of the LORD! He is the everlasting God. He gives strength to
the weary.
Isaiah 41
Let the nations meet for judgement. Do not fear, O Israel. I
will help you. Idols are nothing. I will give a messenger of
good news.
Isaiah 42
Behold, my Servant! He will bring justice to the nations. Sing
to the LORD a new song. Hear, you deaf! The LORD gave
Israel as spoil.
Isaiah 43
But I am with you, O Jacob. I am the LORD. There is no other
saviour. Behold, I will do a new thing! Yet you have not
called upon me.
Isaiah 44
I will pour my Spirit on your offspring. Who makes an idol? A
carpenter prays to a block of wood. I am the LORD who
made all things.
Isaiah 45
The LORD says to Cyrus: For the sake of Jacob I have called
you. I am the LORD. Turn to me and be saved, all the ends
of the earth!
Isaiah 46
The idols of Bel and Nebo are burdens to be carried. O
Jacob, I have made you and I will carry you. I am God and
there is no other.
Isaiah 47
Sit in the dust, O daughter of Babylon. You showed no
mercy. You trusted in sorcery. Evil shall fall upon you. No one
shall save you.
Isaiah 48
Hear this, O Jacob: I have refined you for my own sake. I am
the First and the Last. Thus says your Redeemer: Go out
from Babylon!
Isaiah 49
The LORD formed me in the womb to restore Jacob and to
bring salvation. Can a mother forget her nursing baby? I will
not forget Zion.
Isaiah 50
Have I no power to deliver? The LORD has given me a
learned tongue. I gave my back to those who beat me. He
who justifies me is near.
Isaiah 51
Listen, the LORD will comfort Zion. Awake, O arm of the
LORD! The ransomed shall return. You will drink the cup of
my wrath no more.
Isaiah 52
Awake, O Zion! How beautiful are those who bring good
news. The LORD has redeemed Jerusalem. Behold, my
Servant will be lifted up.
Isaiah 53
He was despised and rejected. He was pierced for our
transgressions. By his wounds we are healed. Out of anguish
he will see light.
Isaiah 54
Sing, O barren woman! Your offspring will inherit the
nations. Your Maker is your husband. No weapon formed
against you will prosper.
Isaiah 55
Come, all you who are thirsty. I will make an everlasting
covenant. My word will not return void. The mountains will
burst into song.
Isaiah 56
Keep justice, for salvation is near. I will bring the outcasts of
Israel to my house and gather still others. The watchmen
are blind.
Isaiah 57
The righteous find peace in death. As for you rebels, you
make your bed wide. Let your idols save you! But I will not
accuse forever.
Isaiah 58
You seek pleasure on your fast days. Is this not the fast I
choose: to loose the bonds of injustice? Then your ruins will
be rebuilt.
Isaiah 59
Your sins have separated you from God. Justice is far from
us. Truth is nowhere. So the LORD put on garments of
salvation and fury.
Isaiah 60
Arise, shine, for your light has come! The nations will come
to you. I will make you majestic forever. Your God will be
your glory.
Isaiah 61
The Spirit of the LORD is on me. He has sent me to proclaim
freedom. My people will inherit a double portion. I delight in
the LORD.
Isaiah 62
For Zion's sake I will not keep silent. You will be given a new
name. Your God will rejoice over you. Raise a banner for the
nations!
Isaiah 63
Why are your robes red? I have trampled the nations. Israel
remembered who brought them through the sea. You, O
LORD, are our father.
Isaiah 64
Oh that you would rend the heavens! You meet those who
do right. We are all the work of your hand. Do not remember
our sins forever.
Isaiah 65
I held out my hands to an obstinate people. My servants will
eat, but you will go hungry. I will create new heavens and a
new earth.
Isaiah 66
Listen! The LORD is repaying his enemies. Rejoice with
Jerusalem and be comforted. All flesh will worship before
me, says the LORD.
Jeremiah
Jeremiah 1
The LORD said to me: I appointed you as a prophet to the
nations. Do not be afraid. I am calling the northern
kingdoms against Judah.
Jeremiah 2
Go and proclaim: My people have exchanged their glory for
idols. You have all rebelled against me. Now I will bring you
to judgement.
Jeremiah 3
Israel played the whore on every hill. Her false sister Judah
saw it. Return, O faithless children! Surely the LORD is our
salvation.
Jeremiah 4
Flee to safety! I am bringing disaster from the north, says
the LORD. I have heard the trumpet! The whole land shall be
a desolation.
Jeremiah 5
Israel and Judah have been utterly unfaithful to me. I am
bringing a distant nation against you. Your sins have
deprived you of good.
Jeremiah 6
Flee from Jerusalem! I appointed watchmen but you would
not listen. An army is coming from the north. My people are
rejected silver.
Jeremiah 7
Proclaim at the temple: Has this house become a den of
thieves? I sent prophets but you did not listen. Judah will
become desolate.
Jeremiah 8
Why do these people refuse to return? They have no shame.
The LORD has doomed us because we have sinned. Is there
no balm in Gilead?
Jeremiah 9
No one speaks the truth. I will scatter these people, says the
LORD. The sound of wailing is heard from Zion. I act with
justice.
Jeremiah 10
Do not learn the ways of the nations. The LORD is the true
God. Listen, a great commotion from the north! They have
devoured Jacob.
Jeremiah 11
Both Israel and Judah have broken my covenant. I will bring
disaster. Do not pray for them. I will punish those who seek
your life.
Jeremiah 12
O LORD, why do the wicked prosper? I have left my house.
Many shepherds have ruined my vineyard. I will uproot my
evil neighbours.
Jeremiah 13
The LORD told me to hide a sash in the rocks. So I will ruin
the pride of Judah, says the LORD. All Judah will be carried
into exile.
Jeremiah 14
There is no water in the cisterns. O LORD, do not forsake us!
I will destroy them by sword and by famine. Can any idols
bring rain?
Jeremiah 15
Send these people away from my presence! Who will mourn
for Jerusalem? O LORD, I suffer insult for you. I am with you,
says the LORD.
Jeremiah 16
The LORD said to me: Do not marry or have children. Why
has the LORD pronounced evil against us? You have followed
your evil hearts.
Jeremiah 17
Cursed are those who trust in man. Blessed are those who
trust in the LORD. If you keep the Sabbath, Jerusalem will
remain forever.
Jeremiah 18
The LORD said: Go to the potter. You are clay in my hand, O
Israel. My people have forgotten me. O LORD, they have
dug a pit for me.
Jeremiah 19
The LORD said: Buy a clay jar. These people have burned
sacrifices to foreign gods. Then break the jar. So I will smash
this nation.
Jeremiah 20
Pashhur put Jeremiah in the stocks. Everyone mocks me.
But the word of the LORD is a fire in my bones. Cursed be
the day I was born!
Jeremiah 21
Zedekiah enquired about Nebuchadnezzar. The LORD says:
Whoever stays in the city will die. Nebuchadnezzar will
destroy it with fire.
Jeremiah 22
Proclaim at the palace: I will make you a desert. Shallum will
not return. They will not lament for Jehoiakim. Coniah is cast
away.
Jeremiah 23
I will raise up a righteous Branch, says the LORD. The
prophets fill you with false hopes. I did not speak, yet they
have prophesied.
Jeremiah 24
The LORD showed me two baskets of figs after the exile to
Babylon. The good figs are the exiles. The bad figs are those
who remain.
Jeremiah 25
You did not listen, says the LORD. So I will summon Babylon.
Make the nations drink my cup of wrath. The LORD will roar
from on high.
Jeremiah 26
The LORD said: Speak in the courts. The priests seized
Jeremiah to kill him, but the officials refused. Uriah had been
put to death.
Jeremiah 27
The LORD said: Put a yoke on your neck. I will hand all the
nations over to serve Nebuchadnezzar. Do not listen to your
prophets.
Jeremiah 28
Hananiah took Jeremiah's yoke and broke it. The LORD said:
Tell Hananiah, I have put an iron yoke on these nations.
Hananiah died.
Jeremiah 29
Jeremiah wrote to the exiles: Seek peace for the city. After
seventy years you will return. Ahab, Zedekiah and Shemaiah
speak lies.
Jeremiah 30
Write these words in a book. I will restore my people, says
the LORD. I have punished you but I will heal you. I will be
your God.
Jeremiah 31
Sing with joy for Jacob! Return to your cities. I will make a
new covenant with Israel, says the LORD. I will put my law
within them.
Jeremiah 32
Jeremiah bought a field in Anathoth. O LORD, the city has
been handed over to Babylon. The LORD says: I will surely
gather my people.
Jeremiah 33
The LORD says: I will tell you great things. I will bring
healing to the land. David will never lack a son on the
throne of Israel.
Jeremiah 34
Tell Zedekiah: You will not escape the king of Babylon. The
people took back their slaves. The LORD says: You have not
obeyed me.
Jeremiah 35
The Rechabites refused to drink wine. The LORD said to
Judah: The command of Jonadab has been obeyed, yet you
have not obeyed me.
Jeremiah 36
Baruch read out Jeremiah's words at the temple. The king
sent for the scroll and burned it. The LORD said: I will bring
disaster.
Jeremiah 37
Zedekiah became king. Jeremiah said: Do not think the
Babylonians will leave us. Irijah arrested Jeremiah. Zedekiah
gave him bread.
Jeremiah 38
Jeremiah was thrown into a cistern. Zedekiah sent for him.
Jeremiah said: If you surrender to the king of Babylon then
you will live.
Jeremiah 39
The Babylonians besieged Jerusalem and captured
Zedekiah. They took the people into exile. Nebuchadnezzar
said: Do not harm Jeremiah.
Jeremiah 40
Nebuzaradan said to Jeremiah: Go back to Gedaliah, who
has been appointed over Judah. The captains warned
Gedaliah about Ishmael.
Jeremiah 41
Ishmael killed Gedaliah and eighty men. Johanan went to
fight Ishmael but he escaped. Johanan led the survivors on
the way to Egypt.
Jeremiah 42
The people asked Jeremiah to pray. The LORD says: If you
stay in the land, I will grant you mercy. If you go to Egypt,
you will die.
Jeremiah 43
Johanan and all the people did not obey the LORD. They
went to Egypt. The LORD said: Nebuchadnezzar will ravage
the land of Egypt.
Jeremiah 44
The LORD says: Why do you provoke me with other gods?
The people said: We will not listen. The LORD says: I am
going to punish you.
Jeremiah 45
When Baruch wrote these words, the LORD said to him: I am
going to break what I have built. Do not seek great things
for yourself.
Jeremiah 46
Of Egypt: There is no healing for you. Prepare yourselves for
exile. I will deliver Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar. But fear not, O
Jacob!
Jeremiah 47
Of the Philistines: Waters are rising from the north. The
LORD is destroying the Philistines. How can the sword of the
LORD be quiet?
Jeremiah 48
Of Moab: Woe to Nebo, for it is laid waste. We have heard of
his arrogance. How it is broken! Moab has become a
derision to all.
Jeremiah 49
The LORD says: Rabbah will become desolate. I will make
Edom small. Damascus has become feeble. Flee, O Hazor. I
will destroy Elam.
Jeremiah 50
Of Babylon: A nation will make her desolate. Judah will seek
the LORD. Repay Babylon for all her deeds. A sword against
her warriors!
Jeremiah 51
The LORD says: I will send a destroyer against Babylon. I will
repay them for the evil done in Zion. Read these words in
Babylon.
Jeremiah 52
Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem. Nebuzaradan burned
the temple and took the people into exile. Evil-merodach
released Jehoiachin.
Lamentations
Lamentations 1
How lonely sits the city! Judah has gone into exile. O LORD, I
am despised. Is any sorrow like mine? There is no one to
comfort me.
Lamentations 2
The LORD has not pitied Jacob. He has abandoned his
sanctuary. My eyes fail with tears. Young and old lie
slaughtered in the streets.
Lamentations 3
He has driven me into darkness. But the steadfast love of
the LORD never ceases. Let us return to the LORD! You will
repay my enemies.
Lamentations 4
The holy stones lie scattered. The children beg for food. The
LORD has poured out his fierce anger. O Zion, your
punishment will end.
Lamentations 5
Look, O LORD, and see our disgrace! We have become
orphans. Slaves rule over us. But you, O LORD, reign
forever. Restore us as of old!
Ezekiel
Ezekiel 1
I saw visions of God. Out of a storm came four creatures. I
saw wheels within wheels. Above them was a throne and
the figure of a man.
Ezekiel 2
He said to me: "Son of man, stand up." The Spirit entered
me. He said: "I send you to rebel Israel." Before me was a
scroll of woe.
Ezekiel 3
He said to me: "Israel will not listen." I came to the exiles.
The LORD said: "I have made you a watchman. I will open
your mouth."
Ezekiel 4
"Son of man, take clay and draw Jerusalem. Then lie on your
side. You shall bear the punishment of Israel. Cook your
bread over dung."
Ezekiel 5
"Son of man, shave your head. Jerusalem has rebelled. A
third shall die of famine, a third by the sword and a third I
will scatter."
Ezekiel 6
"Son of man, prophesy against the mountains of Jerusalem.
The slain shall lie among their idols. They will know that I
am the LORD."
Ezekiel 7
"The end has come! I will punish you for all your
abominations. Silver and gold cannot deliver. The people of
the land will tremble."
Ezekiel 8
The Spirit lifted me up. "Son of man, see what they do.
Elders burn incense to idols. Women weep for Tammuz. Men
worship the sun."
Ezekiel 9
He cried, "Bring the executioners." Six men came. "Kill old
and young, but do not touch those with the mark. I will not
have pity."
Ezekiel 10
He told the man in linen: "Take fire from between the
wheels." Each wheel had four faces. The glory of the LORD
left the temple.
Ezekiel 11
The Spirit said: "These men plot evil." I said: "Will you
destroy the remnant?" The LORD said: "I will put a new spirit
within them."
Ezekiel 12
"Son of man, they are a rebellious house. Bring out your
baggage like an exile. I will disperse them. My word will not
be delayed."
Ezekiel 13
"Woe to the foolish prophets who follow their own spirit. I
will send a storm in my wrath. Woe to the women who sew
magic charms."
Ezekiel 14
The elders came to me. The LORD said: "They have set up
idols in their hearts. Even Noah, Daniel and Job would only
save themselves."
Ezekiel 15
"Son of man, is wood taken from the vine to make anything?
I have given it to the fire for fuel. So I have given up
Jerusalem."
Ezekiel 16
"Jerusalem, I made you flourish. But you played the whore. I
will gather your lovers against you. Yet I will remember my
covenant."
Ezekiel 17
"An eagle planted a vine but it grew towards another eagle.
Israel rebelled against Babylon with Egypt. I myself will
plant a cedar."
Ezekiel 18
"If a man is righteous, he shall live. If a son is violent, he
shall die. I will judge each according to his ways. Repent and
live!"
Ezekiel 19
"Lament for the princes of Israel: A lioness had cubs. One
was taken to Egypt, another to Babylon. A vine was stripped
of its fruit."
Ezekiel 20
"I led Israel out of Egypt. They did not walk in my law. I
withheld my hand for my name's sake. You will know that I
am the LORD."
Ezekiel 21
"Son of man, prophesy against Israel. A sword is sharpened!
Mark the way for the king of Babylon. A ruin, ruin, ruin I will
make it."
Ezekiel 22
"A city that sheds blood. In you they oppress orphans and
widows. Israel has become dross to me. I will pour out my
wrath upon them."
Ezekiel 23
"Two sisters: Samaria and Jerusalem. Oholah lusted after her
lovers. Oholibah was worse in whoring. Bring an army and
cut them down."
Ezekiel 24
"Put meat into the pot. Woe to the bloody city!" My wife
died. The LORD said: "I will profane my sanctuary. Ezekiel
will be a sign."
Ezekiel 25
"To the Ammonites: You jeered at Israel so I will destroy you.
I will judge Moab. I will lay vengeance upon Edom and
Philistia."
Ezekiel 26
"Tyre jeered at Jerusalem so I will make her a bare rock.
Nebuchadnezzar will lay siege to you. I will bring you to a
dreadful end."
Ezekiel 27
"Lament for Tyre: Of oaks they made your oars. Tarshish,
Dedan, Judah and Damascus traded with you. Now you are
wrecked by the seas."
Ezekiel 28
"To the king of Tyre: You were perfect in Eden. You became
proud. I cast you to the ground. There will be no more thorns
for Israel."
Ezekiel 29
"I am against you, Pharaoh, the great dragon. Egypt will
never again rule the nations. Nebuchadnezzar will carry off
its wealth."
Ezekiel 30
"A sword will come upon Egypt. Those who support her will
fall. Nebuchadnezzar will destroy the land. I will break
Pharaoh's arms."
Ezekiel 31
"Assyria was a cedar. It towered above the trees. Its heart
was proud. Foreigners have cut it down. This is Pharaoh and
his hordes."
Ezekiel 32
"Lament for Pharaoh: You are a dragon in the seas. The
sword of Babylon will come upon you. Elam and Edom are
laid with the slain."
Ezekiel 33
"Son of man, I have made you a watchman for Israel."
Jerusalem was struck down. The LORD says: "I have made
the land a desolation."
Ezekiel 34
"Woe to the shepherds of Israel! They did not feed my flock.
I myself will seek my sheep. My servant David will be their
shepherd."
Ezekiel 35
"Son of man, prophesy against Mount Seir: Because you
delivered Israel to the sword, blood will pursue you. You will
be desolate."
Ezekiel 36
"Prophesy to the mountains of Israel: I will make you
inhabited again. I will vindicate my name. I will put my Spirit
within you."
Ezekiel 37
The LORD said: "Prophesy to the bones." The bones became
an army. The LORD said: "Join two sticks. I will join Ephraim
and Judah."
Ezekiel 38
"Son of man, prophesy against Gog: You will come against
my people. My jealousy will be roused. I will summon a
sword against Gog."
Ezekiel 39
"I am against you, O Gog. I will give you a burial place in
Israel. Gather the birds for a feast. Now I will have mercy on
Jacob."
Ezekiel 40
In visions the LORD brought me to a temple. He brought me
through the gates to the inner court. There were tables for
the offerings.
Ezekiel 41
He measured the nave and the inner room. The side
chambers were in three storeys. In front of the Holy Place
was an altar of wood.
Ezekiel 42
He led me to the outer court. The north and south chambers
are where the priests eat the offerings. He measured all the
temple area.
Ezekiel 43
The glory of the LORD filled the temple. He said: "Son of
man, describe the temple to Israel. The priests shall cleanse
the altar."
Ezekiel 44
"No foreigner shall enter my sanctuary. The sons of Zadok
shall minister to me. They shall distinguish between the holy
and unholy."
Ezekiel 45
"Set apart a holy district for the LORD. The prince shall have
land on each side. You shall have honest scales. Celebrate
Passover."
Ezekiel 46
"The prince shall bring offerings on the Sabbaths and New
Moons. You shall offer a lamb daily." In the four corners were
kitchens.
Ezekiel 47
Water was flowing from the temple. He led me in until it was
too deep to cross. The LORD says: "Divide the land among
the tribes."
Ezekiel 48
"Set a portion for each tribe. Adjoining Judah shall be the
portion for the LORD. The name of the city shall be, The
LORD Is There."
Daniel
Daniel 1
Nebuchadnezzar brought the young nobles to Shinar. Daniel
resolved not to defile himself with the king's food. God gave
him wisdom.
Daniel 2
Nebuchadnezzar had dreams. Daniel said, "God reveals
mysteries. You saw a great statue broken by a stone. God
will set up a kingdom."
Daniel 3
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego would not worship the
gold statue. Nebuchadnezzar threw them into the furnace
but God protected them.
Daniel 4
"I, Nebuchadnezzar, dreamt of a tree cut down. Daniel said,
'You shall eat grass like an ox.' Afterwards my kingdom was
restored."
Daniel 5
Belshazzar drank from the temple vessels. A hand wrote on
the wall. Daniel said, "Your kingdom is given to the Medes
and Persians."
Daniel 6
The satraps urged Darius to sign a law against prayer.
Daniel prayed to God and was thrown to the lions. God
closed the lions' mouths.
Daniel 7
Daniel saw visions. I saw four great beasts. The Son of Man
was given an everlasting kingdom. The fourth beast shall be
destroyed.
Daniel 8
I saw a ram with two horns. A goat with a large horn struck
the ram. Gabriel said: "The ram is Media and Persia, the
goat is Greece."
Daniel 9
I read the book of Jeremiah. I prayed, "Israel has sinned. O
God, forgive." Gabriel said, "Seventy weeks are decreed for
atonement."
Daniel 10
As I mourned I saw a man with a face like lightning. He said,
"The prince of Persia delayed me. I came to explain the
latter days."
Daniel 11
"The king of the south will fight the king of the north. The
king of the north will desecrate the temple. He will exalt
himself."
Daniel 12
"There will be a time of distress." I said, "How long?" He
said, "Time, times and half a time. These words are sealed
until the end."
Hosea
Hosea 1
The LORD told Hosea, "Marry an adulterer for the land has
prostituted itself." Gomer had sons. The LORD said, "You are
not my people."
Hosea 2
"Your mother has been unfaithful. I will expose her
lewdness. Now I will speak tenderly to her. I will betroth you
to me forever."
Hosea 3
The LORD said to me, "Go, love your wife again as the LORD
loves Israel." So I bought her back. For Israel will return to
the LORD.
Hosea 4
The LORD has a charge against Israel: "There is no
faithfulness. They have left God to play the whore. The
rulers love shameful ways."
Hosea 5
"Hear this, O priests, O king! Israel shall stumble in his guilt.
Ephraim is crushed in judgement. I will leave until they seek
me."
Hosea 6
Come, let us return to the LORD. On the third day he will
raise us up. "I desire steadfast love, not offerings. Israel is
defiled."
Hosea 7
"The sins of Ephraim are revealed. They are like a heated
oven. They call to Egypt, go to Assyria. Woe to them for they
have strayed!"
Hosea 8
"A vulture is over Israel. The calf of Samaria shall be broken.
The LORD will punish their sins. For Israel has forgotten his
Maker."
Hosea 9
Rejoice not, O Israel! The days of punishment have come. "I
will bereave them. I will drive them from my house." God
will reject them.
Hosea 10
Israel is a rich vine. The LORD will break down their altars.
"Nations shall be gathered against them." It is time to seek
the LORD.
Hosea 11
"When Israel was a child, I loved him. But the sword shall
devour them. How can I give you up, O Ephraim? I will bring
them home."
Hosea 12
"Jacob fought with God. Ephraim has said, 'I am rich.' But I
am the LORD. I spoke through the prophets." The LORD will
repay Ephraim.
Hosea 13
"They make idols of silver. But I am the LORD. I will tear
them open. Ephraim's sin is stored up. Shall I redeem them
from death?"
Hosea 14
O Israel, return to the LORD. "I will heal their apostasy. They
shall blossom like the vine. Whoever is wise, let him
understand."
Joel
Joel 1
What the locust swarm has left other locusts have eaten.
The fields are destroyed. Lament, O priests! The day of the
LORD is near.
Joel 2
A great army is on the mountains. Return to the LORD for he
is merciful. "Fear not, I will restore you. I will pour out my
Spirit."
Joel 3
"I will gather all the nations for judgement. For the day of
the LORD is near. Jerusalem will be inhabited for all
generations."
Amos
Amos 1
The LORD says: "I will punish Damascus. The remnant of the
Philistines shall perish. I will send fire upon Tyre, Edom and
Ammon."
Amos 2
"I will send fire upon Moab and Judah. I will punish Israel.
They sell the poor for a pair of sandals. The mighty shall flee
naked."
Amos 3
Does a lion roar when it has no prey? The LORD reveals his
plans to the prophets. "On the day I punish Israel, I will
punish Bethel."
Amos 4
"You cows of Bashan will be led away with hooks. I withheld
the rain. I overthrew some of you. Prepare to meet your
God, O Israel!"
Amos 5
"Fallen is virgin Israel. Seek me and live. You shall not dwell
in your houses. I despise your feasts. Let justice roll like
waters."
Amos 6
Woe to those who are at ease in Zion, who are not grieved
over Joseph. The LORD declares: "I will raise up a nation
against you."
Amos 7
The LORD showed me locusts, fire and a plumb line.
Amaziah told Amos, "Flee to Judah." Amos said, "You shall
die in an unclean land."
Amos 8
The LORD said: "The end has come upon Israel. I will not
forget your deeds. I will send a famine of hearing the words
of the LORD."
Amos 9
The LORD said: "Strike the pillars until the earth shakes. I
will sieve the house of Israel. In that day I will
restore my
people."
Obadiah
Obadiah 1
The LORD says of Edom: "What disaster awaits you! You
stood aloof when strangers entered Jerusalem. Saviours
shall rule Mount Esau."
Jonah
Jonah 1
The LORD sent Jonah to Nineveh. Jonah fled by ship. A storm
arose and the men threw Jonah into the sea. A great fish
swallowed him.
Jonah 2
Jonah prayed: "I cried out in my distress. Waters surrounded
me. You brought me up from the pit!" The fish vomited him
onto dry land.
Jonah 3
So Jonah went to Nineveh and said, "Nineveh shall be
overthrown!" The people fasted and wore sackcloth. God
relented of the disaster.
Jonah 4
Jonah was angry and said, "O LORD, take my life." A plant
sheltered Jonah but it died. The LORD said, "Should I not pity
Nineveh?"
Micah
Micah 1
The LORD is coming! The mountains will melt. "I will make
Samaria a ruin." Her wound is incurable. Disaster has come
to Jerusalem.
Micah 2
Woe to those who plot evil! The LORD says: "I am planning
disaster. My people have risen up like an enemy. I will
gather a remnant."
Micah 3
You rulers tear the skin from my people. The LORD says,
"The sun will set for the prophets." Zion will be ploughed up
like a field.
Micah 4
In the last days, nations will come to the mountain of the
LORD. Zion will be rescued from Babylon. "I will give you
horns of iron."
Micah 5
"From you, O Bethlehem, will come a ruler." The remnant of
Jacob will be like a lion. "I will punish the nations that did not
obey."
Micah 6
"O my people, have I wearied you?" What does the LORD
require? Act justly and love mercy. "I will make you desolate
for your sins."
Micah 7
The godly have perished from the earth. But I will look to
the LORD. The nations will tremble. Who is a God like you,
forgiving sin?
Nahum
Nahum 1
Against Nineveh: The LORD takes vengeance on his
enemies. The LORD says, "I will break his yoke from you."
Hold your feasts, O Judah!
Nahum 2
The LORD is restoring Jacob. Chariots race through the
streets. Nineveh is like a draining pool. "I am against you,"
declares the LORD.
Nahum 3
Woe to the bloody city! "The nations will look at your
shame." Draw water for the siege. Your shepherds are
asleep, O king of Assyria.
Habakkuk
Habakkuk 1
O LORD, why do you tolerate evil? "Behold, I am raising up
the Chaldeans." Your eyes are pure. Why do you look upon
the treacherous?
Habakkuk 2
The LORD answered: "The just shall live by faith. Woe to him
who plunders nations! What profit is an idol? The LORD is in
his temple."
Habakkuk 3
O LORD, renew your works! He stood and shook the earth.
You crushed the head of the wicked. I will rejoice in the God
of my salvation.
Zephaniah 
Zephaniah 1
"I will sweep away everything from the earth," declares the
LORD. The day of the LORD is near. "I will bring distress on
mankind."
Zephaniah 2
Seek the LORD, you humble. Gaza shall be deserted. The
LORD is against you, O Canaan. He will stretch out his hand
to destroy Assyria.
Zephaniah 3
Woe to the rebellious city! "I have cut off nations. I will leave
a humble people." Sing, O Zion! The LORD will quiet you by
his love.
Haggai
Haggai 1
The LORD says: "Consider your ways! You never have
enough because the temple lies in ruins." So the people
worked on the temple.
Haggai 2
The LORD says: "The latter glory of this temple shall be
greater than the former. This nation is unclean. But now I
will bless you."
Zechariah
Zechariah 1
The LORD said, "Return to me." So the people repented. I
saw a man on a red horse. The LORD said, "I will return to
Zion with mercy."
Zechariah 2
I saw a man going to measure Jerusalem. The LORD says, "I
will be her glory." He sent me to the nations. The LORD will
inherit Judah.
Zechariah 3
Joshua stood before the angel. The LORD rebuked Satan.
They put new clothes on Joshua. The LORD says, "I will bring
forth my servant."
Zechariah 4
I saw a lampstand. I asked the angel about it. "Not by might
but by my Spirit," says the LORD. "Zerubbabel will complete
the temple."
Zechariah 5
I saw a flying scroll. He said, "This is the curse on thieves
and liars." I saw a woman in a basket. He said, "This is
Wickedness."
Zechariah 6
I saw four chariots with red, black, white and dappled
horses. The LORD said, "Make a crown for Joshua. He shall
build the temple."
Zechariah 7
The people asked, "Should we fast?" The LORD said, "Show
mercy and do not oppress. But they would not listen. So I
scattered them."
Zechariah 8
The LORD said: "I am jealous for Zion. I will save my people.
Your fasts shall be feasts. Nations shall seek the LORD in
Jerusalem."
Zechariah 9
The LORD is against Hadrach, Tyre and Philistia. Rejoice, O
Zion! Behold your king, riding on a donkey. The LORD will
save his people.
Zechariah 10
Ask the LORD for rain. From Judah will come the
cornerstone. "I will save Judah for I am the LORD their God. I
will bring them home."
Zechariah 11
The cedar has fallen! The LORD said, "Shepherd the doomed
flock." I broke the two staffs. The LORD said, "Woe to the
idle shepherd!"
Zechariah 12
The LORD said: "I will make Jerusalem an immovable rock.
They will look upon me whom they have pierced. And they
will mourn alone."
Zechariah 13
"There will be a fountain to cleanse from sin. I will remove
prophets from the land. Strike my shepherd and the sheep
will scatter."
Zechariah 14
A day is coming when the LORD will go into battle.
Jerusalem will dwell in security. All the nations will worship
the LORD of hosts.
Malachi
Malachi 1
"I have loved you," says the LORD. "Where is my honour?
You offer blind and lame sacrifices. My name will be great
among the nations."
Malachi 2
"Now, O priests, I will curse you. You have corrupted the
covenant of Levi." Judah has profaned the sanctuary. The
LORD hates divorce.
Malachi 3
"My messenger will prepare the way. I will come to judge.
You have robbed me of tithes. The LORD will remember
those who serve him."
Malachi 4
"The day is coming like a furnace. The sun of righteousness
will rise. The wicked will be ashes. I will send you Elijah the
prophet."
Matthew
Matthew 1
The record of Jesus Christ, son of David, son of Abraham.
Mary bore a son by the Holy Spirit. An angel told Joseph to
name him Jesus.
Matthew 2
Wise men came from the east to worship the child. King
Herod ordered that all the baby boys be killed. An angel
warned Joseph to flee.
Matthew 3
John the Baptist was preaching, "Repent, the kingdom is
near!" Jesus was baptised by John. A voice from heaven
said, "This is my Son."
Matthew 4
Jesus was tempted by Satan in the wilderness. He called
Peter, Andrew, James and John to follow him. He preached
and healed the sick.
Matthew 5
Jesus said, "Blessed are the pure in heart. I have come to
fulfil the law. Whoever is angry will be judged. I say, love
your enemies."
Matthew 6
"Do your good deeds in secret. Pray, 'Father, your kingdom
come.' You cannot serve God and money. Do not be anxious
about your life."
Matthew 7
"Do not judge others. Do to others what you would have
them do to you. Whoever obeys is like a man who built his
house on the rock."
Matthew 8
Jesus cleansed a leper. He healed the servant of a centurion
who had faith. He calmed a storm at sea and cast demons
out of two men.
Matthew 9
Jesus healed a paralytic. Many sinners came to eat with him.
He raised a girl to life and healed two blind men. The crowds
marvelled.
Matthew 10
Jesus sent out the twelve to proclaim the kingdom. "You will
be hated for my name, but do not fear. Whoever receives
you receives me."
Matthew 11
John sent word from prison. Jesus said, "John the Baptist is
Elijah." Jesus denounced the cities and said, "Come, my
burden is light."
Matthew 12
The Pharisees opposed Jesus when he healed on the
Sabbath. He said, "A tree is known by its fruit. The sign of
Jonah will be given."
Matthew 13
Jesus gave a parable about a sower. He told the disciples,
"Seeing they do not see." He said, "The kingdom is like
hidden treasure."
Matthew 14
Herod had John the Baptist killed. Jesus fed 5,000 men with
five loaves and two fish. Jesus came to the disciples walking
on the sea.
Matthew 15
Jesus challenged the Pharisees about tradition. He healed a
Canaanite woman's daughter. He taught on the mountain
and fed 4,000 men.
Matthew 16
Peter said, "You are the Christ." Jesus told them that he must
be killed and be raised. He said, "Take up your cross and
follow me."
Matthew 17
Jesus took Peter, James and John and was transfigured. A
voice said, "This is my son." Jesus healed an epileptic. Peter
paid the tax.
Matthew 18
Jesus said, "Become like children to enter the kingdom. A
shepherd searches for the lost sheep. Forgive seventy times
seven times."
Matthew 19
Jesus was asked about divorce. He said, "Do not separate
what God has joined." He told a rich man, "Sell everything
and follow me."
Matthew 20
"The kingdom is like a master paying wages." Jesus told the
disciples, "The Son of Man came to give his life as a ransom
for many."
Matthew 21
Jesus rode into Jerusalem on a donkey. He healed and taught
in the temple. "A man sent his son to his tenants, but they
killed him."
Matthew 22
Jesus said, "The kingdom is like a wedding." The Pharisees
questioned him about the law. He said, "Love God and love
your neighbour."
Matthew 23
Jesus said, "The Pharisees preach but do not practise. You
strain out a gnat but swallow a camel. You kill and crucify
the prophets."
Matthew 24
Jesus said, "In the end there will be tribulation. Let those in
Judea flee. The Son of Man will come in glory. No one knows
the day."
Matthew 25
"The kingdom is like virgins awaiting the bridegroom. A man
entrusted talents to his servants. The Son of Man will judge
the nations."
Matthew 26
Jesus took Passover with his disciples. He prayed in agony in
Gethsemane. Judas betrayed Jesus to the chief priests. Peter
denied him.
Matthew 27
Jesus was handed over to Pilate. The crowd said, "Crucify
him!" He was mocked and crucified. Darkness fell and he
gave up his spirit.
Matthew 28
The women went to the tomb. An angel said, "He has risen!"
Jesus met them. He came to the eleven and said, "Go and
make disciples."
Mark
Mark 1
Jesus was baptised by John. He called Simon, Andrew, James
and John to follow him. He preached and cast out demons.
He healed a leper.
Mark 2
Many gathered at the house. Jesus forgave a paralytic his
sins and healed him. He was questioned about fasting and
keeping the Sabbath.
Mark 3
Jesus healed a man on the Sabbath. Great crowds followed
him. He appointed twelve apostles. He said, "Whoever
obeys God is my family."
Mark 4
Jesus taught a parable about a sower and many others. He
explained everything to the disciples. In the boat he calmed
a great storm.
Mark 5
Jesus delivered a man of many demons. They entered a
herd of pigs. He healed a woman with a haemorrhage and
raised Jairus' daughter.
Mark 6
He sent the twelve out to preach. Herod executed John the
Baptist. Jesus fed 5,000 men. He came to the disciples
walking on the sea.
Mark 7
The Pharisees questioned Jesus about tradition. He said,
"Evil comes from within." He delivered a Gentile girl and
healed a deaf man.
Mark 8
Jesus fed 4,000 people and healed a blind man. Peter said,
"You are the Christ." Jesus told them that he must be killed
and rise again.
Mark 9
Jesus took Peter, James and John and was transfigured. He
healed an epileptic. The disciples argued about which of
them was greatest.
Mark 10
Jesus was questioned about divorce. He told a rich man to
sell everything. He said, "The first must be last." He healed
Bartimaeus.
Mark 11
Jesus rode into Jerusalem on a donkey. He drove the moneychangers from the temple. The elders asked, "Who gave you
this authority?"
Mark 12
Jesus said, "A man's tenants killed his son." The Pharisees
questioned him about the law. He said, "Love God and love
your neighbour."
Mark 13
Jesus said, "In the end you will be hated by all. Let those in
Judea flee. The Son of Man will come in glory. No one knows
the day."
Mark 14
Jesus took Passover with his disciples. He prayed in agony in
Gethsemane. Judas betrayed him to the chief priests. Peter
denied him.
Mark 15
Jesus was handed over to Pilate. The crowd cried, "Crucify
him!" He was mocked and crucified. Darkness fell and he
breathed his last.
Mark 16
The women went to the tomb. A man in white said, "He has
risen!" Jesus appeared to the disciples. He said, "Go and
preach the gospel."
Luke
Luke 1
The angel Gabriel foretold the birth of John. He told Mary,
"You will have a son named Jesus." Mary said, "My soul
magnifies the Lord!"
Luke 2
Mary gave birth in Bethlehem. Angels sent shepherds to see
the child. Jesus was presented at the temple. He grew in
wisdom and stature.
Luke 3
John came from the wilderness preaching repentance. Jesus
was baptised. He was son of David, son of Abraham, son of
Adam, son of God.
Luke 4
Jesus was tempted by Satan in the wilderness. In the
synagogue he read out, "The Spirit of the Lord is on me." He
healed all the sick.
Luke 5
Simon, James and John left everything and followed Jesus.
Jesus forgave and healed a paralytic. The Pharisees asked
him about fasting.
Luke 6
Jesus healed a man on the Sabbath. He chose twelve
apostles. He said, "Blessed are the poor. Love your enemies.
Hear and do my words."
Luke 7
Jesus healed a centurion's servant and raised a widow's son.
John sent messengers to Jesus. A woman washed Jesus' feet
with her tears.
Luke 8
Jesus told a parable about a sower. He explained it to his
disciples. He calmed a storm, delivered a man and healed
Jairus' daughter.
Luke 9
Jesus sent out the twelve. He fed 5,000 men. Peter said,
"You are the Christ." Jesus said, "Take up your cross." He was
transfigured.
Luke 10
Jesus sent out the seventy-two. A lawyer asked, "Who is my
neighbour?" Jesus said, "A man was robbed. He was helped
by a Samaritan."
Luke 11
Jesus said, "Pray, 'Father, your kingdom come.' Seek and
you will find. Only the sign of Jonah will be given. Woe to
you Pharisees!"
Luke 12
Jesus said, "Even the hairs of your head are numbered. Sell
your possessions. Be ready for the Son of Man. I came to
bring division."
Luke 13
Jesus said, "Repent or you will perish." He healed a woman
on the Sabbath. He said, "Seek the narrow door. I must go
on to Jerusalem."
Luke 14
Jesus said, "Choose the lowest place. A man gave a banquet
but his guests made excuses. To be my disciple you must
carry your cross."
Luke 15
Jesus said, "Heaven rejoices when a sinner repents. A son
squandered his father's wealth. He returned and his father
called a feast."
Luke 16
"A shrewd manager reduced his master's bills before he was
fired. Abraham would not send Lazarus to comfort a rich
man in Hades."
Luke 17
Jesus said, "If your brother repents, forgive him." He healed
ten lepers. He said, "In his day the Son of Man will light up
the sky."
Luke 18
Jesus gave parables about prayer. He told a rich man to sell
everything. He said, "The Son of Man will be killed but he
will rise."
Luke 19
Jesus ate with Zacchaeus. He told a parable about servants
in the kingdom. He rode into Jerusalem on a colt and wept
over the city.
Luke 20
The elders questioned Jesus' authority. Jesus said, "A man's
tenants killed his son." So they asked about taxes and the
resurrection.
Luke 21
Jesus said, "The temple will be thrown down. Jerusalem will
be trampled. The Son of Man will come in glory. Stay awake
at all times."
Luke 22
Jesus took Passover with the disciples. He prayed at the
Mount of Olives. Judas betrayed him to the chief priests.
Peter denied him.
Luke 23
Jesus was taken to Pilate. The crowd said, "Crucify him!" He
was crucified with two criminals. Darkness fell and he
breathed his last.
Luke 24
The women found the tomb empty. Jesus met two on the
road to Emmaus. He appeared to the disciples and opened
the Scriptures to them.
John
John 1
The Word of God became flesh and dwelt with us. John the
Baptist bore witness to him. Andrew told Simon Peter and
they followed Jesus.
John 2
Jesus turned water into wine at a wedding. He drove moneychangers from the temple. He said, "Destroy this temple
and I will raise it."
John 3
Jesus told Nicodemus, "Be born again. Whoever believes in
the Son will have eternal life." John the Baptist said, "He is
above all."
John 4
Jesus spoke with a Samaritan woman about her husbands.
She said, "Can this be the Christ?" Many believed. He healed
an official's son.
John 5
Jesus healed a man at Bethesda. He said, "The Son only
does what he sees the Father doing. My works and the
Scriptures bear witness."
John 6
Jesus fed 5,000 men and walked across the sea. He said, "I
am the bread of life. My flesh is true food." Many disciples
turned back.
John 7
Jesus went to the feast. The people said, "Is this the Christ?"
The chief priests tried to arrest him. He called out, "Come
and drink."
John 8
Jesus did not condemn a woman caught in adultery. The
Pharisees questioned him. He said, "If God were your Father
you would love me."
John 9
Jesus healed a blind man on the Sabbath. The Pharisees
called the man and threw him out. Jesus said, "I came that
the blind may see."
John 10
Jesus said, "I am the good shepherd. I give my life for the
sheep." They asked, "Are you the Christ?" He said, "My
sheep follow me."
John 11
Lazarus died. Jesus went to the tomb and said, "Lazarus,
come out." Lazarus came out. The chief priests plotted to
put Jesus to death.
John 12
Jesus rode into Jerusalem. The crowd shouted, "Hosanna!"
He said, "The Son of Man must be lifted up. I have come to
save the world."
John 13
Jesus washed the disciples' feet. He said, "One of you will
betray me." Judas left. Jesus said, "Love each other as I have
loved you."
John 14
"I am the way, the truth, and the life. I am in the Father and
the Father in me. He will give you the Holy Spirit. Do not be
afraid."
John 15
"I am the vine, you are the branches. You are my friends if
you do what I command. If they persecuted me, they will
persecute you."
John 16
"The Spirit will convict the world of sin. He will guide you
into all truth. Your sorrow will turn to joy. I am going to the
Father."
John 17
Jesus said, "Father, I have revealed your name to those you
gave me. Sanctify them in the truth. May all who believe in
me be one."
John 18
Judas betrayed Jesus to the chief priests. Peter denied him.
He was sent before Pilate. Jesus said, "My kingdom is not of
this world."
John 19
The soldiers took Jesus and crucified him. He said, "It is
finished." He gave up his spirit. A soldier pierced his side
with a spear.
John 20
Mary went to the tomb and found it empty. Jesus met her.
He came and stood among the disciples. Thomas said, "My
Lord and my God!"
John 21
Jesus appeared as the disciples were fishing. He said to
Peter, "Do you love me? Feed my sheep." The beloved
disciple has testified.
Acts
Acts 1
Jesus said, "You will receive the Spirit and be my witnesses."
He was taken up in a cloud. The believers cast lots to
replace Judas.
Acts 2
At Pentecost they were filled with the Spirit. Peter told the
crowd, "You crucified Jesus but God has made him Lord."
3,000 believed.
Acts 3
Peter and John healed a lame man at the temple. Peter told
the people, "Faith in Jesus has healed this man. Repent of
your sins."
Acts 4
They were taken before the rulers. Peter and John said, "We
cannot stop speaking about Jesus." The believers prayed for
boldness.
Acts 5
Ananias and Sapphira told a lie and fell dead. An angel
released the apostles from prison. Gamaliel advised, "Leave
these men alone."
Acts 6
The disciples chose seven men to distribute food. Some
from the synagogue disputed with Stephen. They took him
before the council.
Acts 7
Stephen said, "Brothers, God called Abraham and appeared
to Moses. You killed the Righteous One." They were enraged
and stoned him.
Acts 8
Philip proclaimed Christ in Samaria. A magician offered
money for the gift of the Spirit. Philip baptised an Ethiopian
official.
Acts 9
Saul went to arrest the believers. Jesus said, "Why do you
persecute me?" Saul was baptised and began preaching.
Peter raised Dorcas.
Acts 10
Cornelius sent for Peter. The Lord said to Peter, "Do not call
them unclean." Peter preached to the Gentiles and the Spirit
fell.
Acts 11
Some in Jerusalem criticised Peter. He said, "The Spirit told
me to go." Many in Antioch believed. Barnabas and Saul
taught there.
Acts 12
Herod killed James and arrested Peter. The church prayed
earnestly. An angel led Peter out of prison. An angel struck
Herod down.
Acts 13
Paul and Barnabas proclaimed the word. Paul said, "God has
sent a Saviour, Jesus, as he promised." The Jews stirred up
persecution.
Acts 14
Many believed at Iconium. The crowd at Lystra wanted to
worship Paul, then they stoned him. Paul and Barnabas
returned to Antioch.
Acts 15
Some men taught circumcision for the Gentiles. Peter said,
"God gave the Spirit with no distinction." Paul and Barnabas
separated.
Acts 16
Paul took Timothy with him. We baptised Lydia in Philippi.
Paul was imprisoned and there was an earthquake. The
jailer was baptised.
Acts 17
They taught in Thessalonica and Berea. In Athens Paul said,
"I proclaim the God who gives life to all. He will judge the
world."
Acts 18
Paul taught in Corinth for a year and a half. He went to
Ephesus with Priscilla and Aquila. Priscilla and Aquila taught
Apollos.
Acts 19
Paul laid his hands on the disciples at Ephesus to receive
the Holy Spirit. Demetrius, a silversmith, started a riot in the
city.
Acts 20
We sailed to Troas. Paul raised Eutychus after he fell from
the window. Paul encouraged the Ephesian elders to care for
the flock.
Acts 21
Paul was warned not to go to Jerusalem. He said, "I am
ready to die." We went there and saw James. Paul was
arrested in the temple.
Acts 22
Paul said, "Jesus appeared to me and sent me to the
Gentiles." The crowd threw dust. Paul told the tribune, "I am
a Roman citizen."
Acts 23
Paul caused a dissension between the Pharisees and
Sadducees. The Jews plotted to kill him. The tribune sent
him to governor Felix.
Acts 24
Tertullus accused Paul before Felix. Paul said, "I simply went
to worship in the temple." Felix kept Paul in prison for two
years.
Acts 25
Festus arrived and summoned Paul. Paul said, "I appeal to
Caesar." Festus brought Paul before King Agrippa to decide
the charges.
Acts 26
Paul said, "I opposed the name of Jesus. He appeared to me
and made me a witness." Agrippa said, "This man could
have been freed."
Acts 27
We set sail for Rome. A storm struck and all hope was lost.
Paul said, "Take heart, we must run aground." Everyone
reached land.
Acts 28
On Malta Paul healed all who had diseases. We came to
Rome. Paul lived under house arrest. He proclaimed the
kingdom of God to all.
Romans
Romans 1
Paul, to the saints in Rome. I am eager to preach the gospel
to you. The unrighteous have no excuse. God gave them up
to their lusts.
Romans 2
In judging you condemn yourself. The doers of the law will
be justified. Do you boast in the law but break it? A Jew is
one inwardly.
Romans 3
The Jews were given the oracles of God. But no one is
justified by the law. All have sinned and are justified through
faith in Jesus.
Romans 4
Abraham was counted righteous by faith before he was
circumcised. He is the father of all who believe. The promise
depends on faith.
Romans 5
Therefore we rejoice in hope. While we were sinners, Christ
died for us. As sin came through one man, so grace abounds
through Christ.
Romans 6
We were baptised into Christ's death. So consider
yourselves dead to sin and alive to God. Offer yourselves to
God for righteousness.
Romans 7
You have died to the law. Is the law sin? No, sin produced
death in me. I do not do what I want to do. My flesh serves
the law of sin.
Romans 8
The law of the Spirit has set you free. We are children of God
and co-heirs with Christ. Nothing can separate us from the
love of God.
Romans 9
I grieve for my kinsmen. But not all Israel are Israel. God has
mercy on whom he wills. Israel did not pursue righteousness
by faith.
Romans 10
Everyone who calls on the Lord will be saved. How will they
hear if no one preaches? Moses says of Israel, "I will make
you jealous."
Romans 11
Even now there is a remnant of Israel. You Gentiles have
been grafted into the tree. All Israel will be saved. Glory to
God forever!
Romans 12
Present your bodies as a living sacrifice to God. We are one
body in Christ. Love one another as brothers. Overcome evil
with good.
Romans 13
Submit to authorities. Pay taxes to those due taxes. Owe
nothing except love, which fulfils the law. Clothe yourselves
with Christ.
Romans 14
Accept those who are weak in faith. Everything is clean but
it is wrong to cause anyone to stumble. Whatever is not of
faith is sin.
Romans 15
Each of us should build up our neighbours. Christ confirmed
the promises given to the patriarchs. I hope to see you as I
go to Spain.
Romans 16
I commend to you Phoebe. Greet Prisca, Aquila, Andronicus,
Junia and Rufus. Avoid those who cause divisions. Glory to
God forever!
1 Corinthians
1 Corinthians 1
Paul, to the church in Corinth. Let there be no divisions. The
cross is folly to those perishing, but to us it is the power of
God.
1 Corinthians 2
I knew nothing among you except Christ crucified. We speak
the wisdom of God. Through the Spirit we know what God
has freely given.
1 Corinthians 3
You are still infants. One follows Paul, another Apollos. We
are co-workers with God. Christ is the foundation. You are
God's temple.
1 Corinthians 4
Think of us as stewards of the mysteries of God. You are
kings already? We are fools for Christ. I admonish you as my
dear children.
1 Corinthians 5
You boast about the sexual immorality among you. You
should deliver that man to Satan. But I am not judging those
outside the church.
1 Corinthians 6
Do you take one another to court? Why not rather be
wronged? Your body is not for sexual immorality, it is a
temple of the Spirit.
1 Corinthians 7
It is good to stay unmarried, but better to marry than to
burn with lust. Each should live as God has called. I want
you to be free.
1 Corinthians 8
About food offered to idols: An idol is nothing. There is only
one God. But if food makes my brother stumble I will never
eat meat.
1 Corinthians 9
You are the seal of my apostleship. Do we not have the right
to material support? But I made myself a servant to all for
the gospel.
1 Corinthians 10
Do not desire evil as our fathers did. God will make you able
to endure temptation. Flee from idolatry. Do all to the glory
of God.
1 Corinthians 11
The head of a woman is her husband. I hear that some go
hungry when you meet! With the bread and cup you
proclaim the Lord's death.
1 Corinthians 12
Now there are various spiritual gifts, but one Spirit. If the
whole body were an eye, how would it hear? You are the
body of Christ.
1 Corinthians 13
Without love I am nothing. Love is patient, does not boast,
endures all things. Tongues will cease, but faith, hope and
love remain.
1 Corinthians 14
Tongues edifies the speaker, prophecy edifies the church.
Each of you brings a hymn, a lesson or a tongue. Let all be
done in order.
1 Corinthians 15
Christ was raised from the dead. If not then your faith is
futile. But he is the firstfruits. At the trumpet we will all be
changed.
1 Corinthians 16
Put aside an offering for the saints. I will come to you. The
churches of Asia greet you. The grace of our Lord Jesus be
with you.
2 Corinthians
2 Corinthians 1
Paul, to the church in Corinth. We share in Christ's sufferings
and comfort. My yes is not no, but to spare you I did not
visit you.
2 Corinthians 2
I wrote to you as I did in much anguish. You should forgive
the one who caused you pain. Through us God spreads the
aroma of Christ.
2 Corinthians 3
God has made us ministers of a new covenant. When
anyone turns to the Lord, the veil is lifted. We are being
transformed into glory.
2 Corinthians 4
God has given us the light of the glory of Christ. We have
this treasure in clay jars. Through affliction we look to what
is eternal.
2 Corinthians 5
What is mortal will be clothed with life. If anyone is in Christ,
the new creation has come. We implore you, be reconciled
to God!
2 Corinthians 6
Now is the day of salvation. We commend ourselves as
servants. Do not be yoked with unbelievers. We are the
temple of the living God.
2 Corinthians 7
I take great pride in you. I do not regret my letter, for godly
grief produces repentance. Our boasts about you to Titus
proved true.
2 Corinthians 8
The churches of Macedonia have given generously for the
saints. See that you excel in this grace too. Titus was eager
to go to you.
2 Corinthians 9
I boast to the Macedonians about the gift you promised. God
loves a cheerful giver. Your generosity will overflow in
thanksgivings.
2 Corinthians 10
Our weapons destroy arguments against God. What we say
by letter we do in person. We only boast within the sphere
God has given us.
2 Corinthians 11
I am jealous for you against these false apostles. I speak as
a fool. Do they boast? I have greater labours, beatings and
dangers.
2 Corinthians 12
I will boast of a man who saw paradise. I was given a thorn
to keep me from pride. This is foolish! I will gladly be spent
for you.
2 Corinthians 13
This will be my third visit. Christ is powerful among you. Test
that you are in the faith. Be mature. The grace of God be
with you.
Galatians
Galatians 1
Paul, to the churches of Galatia. You are already turning to a
different gospel! The gospel I preached came by revelation
from Christ.
Galatians 2
I went up to Jerusalem and saw the leaders. I opposed
Cephas about circumcision. We are justified by faith in Christ
and not by works.
Galatians 3
Those who are of faith are blessed with Abraham. Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the law. In Christ you are all
sons of God.
Galatians 4
God sent his Son for us to receive adoption. How can you
turn back to worthless principles? You, like Isaac, are
children of promise.
Galatians 5
Christ has set us free. Circumcision counts for nothing. Use
your freedom to love one another. Walk by the Spirit and not
the flesh.
Galatians 6
Restore anyone caught in sin. Sow to the Spirit and reap
eternal life. Let us not give up doing good. What counts is
the new creation.
Ephesians
Ephesians 1
Paul, to the saints in Ephesus. Praise the God who
predestined us for adoption in Christ. May you know the
riches of his inheritance.
Ephesians 2
When we were dead in sin God made us alive with Christ.
Gentiles are now fellow citizens. You are being built together
into a temple.
Ephesians 3
I preach the mystery of Christ. The wisdom of God is made
known through the church. I pray that you may know the
depth of his love.
Ephesians 4
Therefore walk worthy of your calling. Christ gave each of us
gifts to build up the body. Put off your old self and put on the
new.
Ephesians 5
Walk in love as Christ loved us. Walk as children of light.
Expose the darkness. Husbands, love your wives as Christ
loved the church.
Ephesians 6
Children, obey your parents. Slaves, obey your masters. Put
on the whole armour of God to stand against the devil.
Peace and grace.
Philippians
Philippians 1
Paul, to the saints in Philippi. I thank God for you. My
imprisonment has advanced the gospel. To live is Christ and
to die is gain.
Philippians 2
Have the mind of Christ, who humbled himself even to a
cross. Work out your salvation with trembling. I hope to send
Timothy to you.
Philippians 3
We put no confidence in the flesh. I count all things as loss
compared to Christ. I press on towards the prize. Brothers,
imitate me.
Philippians 4
Rejoice in the Lord always! The peace of God will guard your
hearts. I rejoice at your concern for me. My God will supply
your needs.
Colossians
Colossians 1
Paul, to the saints in Colossae. May you be filled with
wisdom. The Son is the image of the invisible God. I make
known the mystery.
Colossians 2
Let no one deceive you. You were buried with Christ and also
raised with him. Why do you follow rules that do not restrain
the flesh?
Colossians 3
Seek the things above. Your life is hidden with Christ in God.
So put to death your worldliness. Do everything in the name
of Jesus.
Colossians 4
Devote yourselves to prayer. Let your speech be gracious.
Tychicus will tell you our news. Aristarchus, Mark and
Epaphras greet you.
1 Thessalonians
1 Thessalonians 1
Paul, Silvanus and Timothy, to the Thessalonians. We give
thanks for you. Our gospel came in power. Your faith is an
example to all.
1 Thessalonians 2
We shared the gospel with you and also our lives. You
suffered like the churches in Judea. We tried to see you. Are
you not our crown?
1 Thessalonians 3
We sent Timothy to strengthen you. We warned you that
persecution would come. We are encouraged by your faith.
May you grow in love.
1 Thessalonians 4
Live to please God. Avoid immorality. Love one another
more and more. We do not grieve without hope, for the
dead in Christ will rise.
1 Thessalonians 5
The day of the Lord will come like a thief. Let us keep awake.
Honour those who lead you. Do not quench the Spirit. Grace
be with you.
2 Thessalonians
2 Thessalonians 1
Paul, Silvanus and Timothy, to the Thessalonians. We boast
of your faith through persecution. The Lord Jesus will appear
in vengeance.
2 Thessalonians 2
Do not be alarmed about the day of the Lord. First the
lawless one will appear, whom Jesus will destroy. Hold fast
to our traditions.
2 Thessalonians 3
Finally, pray for us. The Lord will guard you against the evil
one. Keep away from anyone who walks in idleness. The
Lord be with you.
1 Timothy
1 Timothy 1
Paul, to Timothy my son. Stay in Ephesus to correct false
teachers. Christ came into the world to save sinners. Glory
to God forever!
1 Timothy 2
Let prayers be made for all those in authority. God wants
everyone to come to the knowledge of the truth. Let women
learn in silence.
1 Timothy 3
An overseer must be respectable and manage his family
well. Deacons must be dignified and not greedy. Godliness is
a great mystery.
1 Timothy 4
In later times some will depart from the faith. Have nothing
to do with godless myths. Devote yourself to Scripture and
to teaching.
1 Timothy 5
Put widows over sixty on the list. Younger widows should
marry. Elders who rule well are worthy of double honour.
Keep yourself pure.
1 Timothy 6
Those who contradict the teaching of Christ understand
nothing. The love of money is a root of evil. Fight the good
fight of faith.
2 Timothy
2 Timothy 1
Paul, to Timothy my son. Fan into flame the gift of God.
Share in suffering for the gospel. Hold to the standard of
sound teaching.
2 Timothy 2
No soldier gets entangled with civilian affairs. Present
yourself to God as an approved worker. Cleanse yourself for
honourable use.
2 Timothy 3
In the last days people will be proud and unholy. As for you,
continue in what you have learned. All Scripture is inspired
by God.
2 Timothy 4
Preach the word in and out of season. I have finished my
race. Come to me soon with Mark. Beware of Alexander. The
Lord be with you.
Titus
Titus 1
Paul, a servant of God, to Titus. I left you in Crete to appoint
elders. Deceivers must be silenced. To the impure nothing is
pure.
Titus 2
Teach what is consistent with sound doctrine. Men are to be
steadfast, women reverent. The grace of God trains us to
live godly lives.
Titus 3
Show consideration to all. We were once slaves but God
saved us. Believers should maintain good works. Everyone
here sends greetings.
Philemon
Philemon 1
Paul, a prisoner, to Philemon. I ask that you receive
Onesimus back, not as a slave, but as a brother. Put his
wrongs on my account.
Hebrews
Hebrews 1
In these last days God has spoken by his Son. Of the Son he
says, "Let the angels worship him." And, "Your throne, O
God, is forever."
Hebrews 2
We must pay closer attention. The author of salvation tasted
death for everyone. He was made like us to make
atonement for our sins.
Hebrews 3
Jesus has more honour than Moses. He is the Son over God's
house. Therefore, "Do not harden your hearts as they did in
the rebellion."
Hebrews 4
Let us fear lest anyone fails to reach the promised rest. The
word of God judges the heart. So we boldly approach the
throne of grace.
Hebrews 5
Every high priest from among men is subject to weakness.
Christ is a high priest in the order of Melchizedek. You still
need teaching.
Hebrews 6
Let us press on to maturity. It is impossible to restore those
who fall away. The promise of God is a steadfast anchor for
the soul.
Hebrews 7
Abraham gave a tithe to Melchizedek, who had no end. Our
Lord became a priest through indestructible life. He is
always able to save.
Hebrews 8
We have a high priest who ministers in the true tent. He
mediates a better covenant. He says, "I will write my laws
on their hearts."
Hebrews 9
The high priest enters the Most Holy Place once a year with
blood. Christ entered the true holy place once for all by his
own blood.
Hebrews 10
The law is but a shadow. Animal blood cannot take away
sins. Christ offered one sacrifice forever. So let us hold fast
to our hope.
Hebrews 11
Faith is the proof of hope. By faith the world was made. By
faith Abraham obeyed. By faith Moses left Egypt. In faith
some suffered.
Hebrews 12
Let us run the race, looking to Jesus. God is disciplining you
as sons. See that no one falls short of grace. Let us worship
in awe.
Hebrews 13
Let love continue. Marriage should be honoured. Let us bear
the reproach Christ endured. Submit to your leaders. Grace
be with you.
James
James 1
James, to the tribes. Many trials produce perseverance.
Riches will fade. Every good gift comes from the Father. Be
doers of the word.
James 2
If you show partiality to the rich you are committing sin. Act
as those who are under the law of liberty. Faith without
works is dead.
James 3
No one can tame the tongue. With it we bless our Father
and with it we curse others. The wisdom from above is pure
and peace-loving.
James 4
Your worldly desires cause conflict. Resist the devil, draw
near to God. Who are you to judge your neighbour? You
boast in arrogance.
James 5
You rich have fattened yourselves for slaughter. Brothers, be
patient until the Lord comes. The prayer of faith will save
the sick.
1 Peter
1 Peter 1
Peter, to the diaspora. God has given us new birth through
Christ. The prophets told of this grace. So be holy in all your
conduct.
1 Peter 2
You are being built up to be a royal priesthood. Submit to
human authority. Live as servants of God. Follow Christ in
his suffering.
1 Peter 3
Wives, submit to your husbands. Husbands, honour your
wives. Repay evil with blessing. Christ suffered for sins to
bring us to God.
1 Peter 4
Do not live for human desires but for the will of God. The
end is near. Love each other deeply. Do not be surprised
when trials come.
1 Peter 5
Elders should be examples to the flock. Clothe yourselves
with humility. Resist the devil. God will strengthen you.
Peace to you all.
2 Peter
2 Peter 1
Peter, to those of faith. God has given us great promises. So
supplement faith with virtue and love. We were
eyewitnesses of Christ.
2 Peter 2
False teachers will arise. If God did not spare angels then he
knows how to punish the unrighteous. They are slaves of
corruption.
2 Peter 3
Scoffers will say, "Where is his return?" The Lord is not slow,
but patient. Untaught people twist the Scriptures. Grow in
Christ.
1 John
1 John 1
We have seen and proclaim to you the Word of life. God is
light. If we walk in the light, the blood of Jesus cleanses us
from all sin.
1 John 2
We know Christ if we keep his commands. Whoever loves
his brother lives in the light. Do not love the world. Children,
abide in him.
1 John 3
We are God's children. Those born of God do not sin. We
should love one another. We know love because he laid
down his life for us.
1 John 4
Any spirit that confesses Christ is of God. God is love. He
sent his Son as a sacrifice for sins. If we live in love, God
lives in us.
1 John 5
Anyone born of God overcomes the world. The Spirit, water
and blood all testify. God gave us eternal life in his Son.
Keep from idols.
2 John
2 John 1
The elder, to the elect lady. Let us love one another as the
Father commands. Do not welcome false teachers. I hope to
come to you.
3 John
3 John 1
The elder, to beloved Gaius. I was overjoyed to hear of your
faithfulness. Diotrephes spreads false charges. I hope to see
you soon.
Jude
Jude 1
Jude, to the elect. Ungodly people pervert grace into
sensuality. They are judged as twice dead trees. Build
yourselves up in faith.
Revelation
Revelation 1
The revelation of Jesus Christ to John. A voice said, "Write to
the churches." I saw one like a son of man, his face was like
the sun.
Revelation 2
"Ephesus, renew your first love. Smyrna, be faithful until
death. Pergamum, some hold false teaching. Thyatira, you
tolerate Jezebel."
Revelation 3
"Sardis, you are not alive but dead. Philadelphia, you have
endured in my word. Laodicea, you are lukewarm so I will
spit you out."
Revelation 4
I saw one seated on the throne in heaven. The four living
creatures say, "Holy, holy, holy." The elders say, "You
created all things."
Revelation 5
A Lamb standing as though slain took the scroll with seven
seals. The creatures, elders and myriad angels sang,
"Worthy is the Lamb!"
Revelation 6
The Lamb opened four seals and the horsemen went out to
destroy. With the fifth seal I saw the martyrs. With the sixth
the stars fell.
Revelation 7
The 144,000 were sealed from the tribes. A multitude cried,
"Salvation belongs to our God." An elder said, "God will wipe
every tear."
Revelation 8
With the seventh seal there was silence. I saw seven angels.
Four angels blew their trumpets and a third of the earth was
destroyed.
Revelation 9
At the fifth trumpet, locusts from the pit tormented the
earth. At the sixth trumpet, four angels killed a third of
mankind with fire.
Revelation 10
I saw an angel with a scroll. He cried out and seven
thunders sounded. A voice said, "Eat the scroll." It was
sweet and then bitter.
Revelation 11
The two witnesses will prophesy until the beast kills them.
At the seventh trumpet, loud voices said, "Our God shall
reign forever."
Revelation 12
A woman giving birth and a great dragon appeared. Michael
and his angels fought the dragon. The dragon was thrown
down to the earth.
Revelation 13
I saw a beast rising out of the sea. It spoke blasphemy
against God. Another beast rose and gave everyone a mark.
Its number is 666.
Revelation 14
I saw the Lamb in Zion with the 144,000. Angels said, "The
hour of judgement has come." The earth was reaped with a
sharp sickle.
Revelation 15
I saw angels with seven plagues. Those who conquered
sang, "Just are your ways, Lord!" The angels were given
seven bowls of wrath.
Revelation 16
The bowls of wrath were poured out. The seas turned to
blood, darkness fell, the kings gathered at Armageddon and
the earth quaked.
Revelation 17
I saw a prostitute on a beast with seven heads and ten
horns. An angel said, "The heads and horns are kings. The
Lamb will conquer."
Revelation 18
An angel cried, "Fallen, fallen is Babylon!" The kings and
merchants will weep. An angel said, "The great city will be
thrown down."
Revelation 19
A multitude cried, "Hallelujah! The Lord reigns." The Word of
God led the armies of heaven. The beast was cast into the
lake of fire.
Revelation 20
Satan was bound and the martyrs reigned with Christ for
1,000 years. Then Satan was cast into the lake of fire. The
dead were judged.
Revelation 21
I saw a new heaven and earth. A voice said, "God dwells
with his people." An angel showed me the new Jerusalem.
Its lamp is the Lamb.
Revelation 22
The river of life flows from the throne of God. "Behold, I am
coming soon. I am the beginning and the end." Amen.
Come, Lord Jesus!